Title: Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23867v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:27:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Valerie Tsao 1 Nathaniel Chaney 1 Manolis Veveakis 1

Abstract 

Scientific measurements are often bottlenecked by suboptimal conditions, whether that be noise, incomplete spatial coverage, or limited resolu-tion, rendering accurate field reconstruction a dif-ficult task. We introduce LatentPDE, a latent dif-fusion framework designed to simultaneously re-solve sparse-observation reconstruction and super-resolution. While existing physics-guided diffu-sion models typically rely on soft loss penalties or uninterpretable representations, our approach enforces physical compliance by constructing an inherently interpretable latent space. Specifically, we parameterize the latent variables directly as the coefficients and source terms of an assumed governing PDE. In doing so, LatentPDE is able to reliably reconstruct dynamics across highly dis-parate and structured data gaps. Empirical results on diverse configurations demonstrate that our model achieves high-fidelity recovery at any de-sired resolution while also tracking the underlying predictive uncertainty. 

1. Introduction 

Physical systems in real-world settings are canonically diffi-cult to emulate and monitor. Observation stations are sparse, and measurements are corrupted and typically limited in res-olution by technological or financial barriers. When direct measurements are deficient and unable to fully define a sys-tem, inverse modeling bridges these observational gaps by relying on governing partial differential equations (PDEs) as structural constraints. Existing inverse methods, however, fail to bridge these gaps consistently. Classical approaches scale poorly to high-dimensional states and lack the ability to quantify uncer-tainty. Recent innovations in operator-based (Kovachki   

> 1Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Duke University, NC, USA. Correspondence to: Valerie Tsao <va-lerie.tsao@duke.edu >.
> Preprint. April 28, 2026.

et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2024) and physics-informed neu-ral networks have made progress on this front (Baldan et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024), but generally under idealized assumptions of clean, full-coverage data fields at desired resolutions, and at most only address one of these challenges at a time. Furthermore, these methods tend to treat govern-ing physics as a soft regularizer meant to guide rather than 

enforce constraints, allowing models to still violate physics at inference time. This can lead to oversmoothed reconstruc-tions that miss important system dynamics. In high-stakes applications like localized extreme weather forecasting and medical imaging (Kashinath et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2021), decision-makers cannot make informed assessments on such ambiguous outputs. They require both physically aligned reconstructions and calibrated confidence intervals to safely determine risk levels and mitigate for worst-case scenarios. We propose a latent diffusion framework that trains directly on sparse fields while explicitly embedding governing laws via an interpretable latent space. Rather than applying a physics penalty to our loss term, our core insight is to em-bed the governing laws directly into the architecture by using PDE coefficients as our latent representation. By de-coding this latent space via a differentiable spectral solver, the framework imposes physics as a structural constraint on the solution manifold. In doing so, we are able to accom-modate highly structured missingness rather than merely handling uniform random sparsity. This hard-enforcement in the spectral domain achieves super-resolution at inference and provides the inductive bias needed to solve traditionally ill-posed sparse reconstructions. To our knowledge, Latent-PDE is the first to directly couple the denoising framework of diffusion models with the coefficient space, thereby guar-anteeing a physically-plausible reconstruction while provid-ing intrinsic uncertainty quantification on noisy, spatially incomplete data at sub-target resolutions. We empirically validate LatentPDE across three separate classes of PDEs: advection–diffusion (parabolic), Klein– Gordon (hyperbolic), and Helmholtz (elliptical). The frame-work is benchmarked against a wide set of challenging ini-tial conditions and diverse source terms as defined by a 2D Fourier expansion. Even when evaluated against out-of-distribution (OOD) masks, our framework surpasses other 1

> arXiv:2604.23867v1 [cs.LG] 26 Apr 2026

Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity time frequency   

> LR observations latent diffusion model spectral solver noising denoising latent space latent diffusion model LR full reconstruction super-resolution sparse observations + noise
> training inference
> observations latent space conditioning context reconstructed solutions
> LR initial conditions MAP estimation point estimator (MLP)

Figure 1. Schematic of LatentPDE framework. Sparse, noised, low-resolution observations and initial conditions ( ulr  

> 0

) are encoded (via MAP or MLP) into a latent space of unknown PDE coefficients. A noising-denoising algorithm refines these parameters before a spectral solver decodes them, recovering full and high-resolution fields that strictly enforce governing physics. 

state-of-the-art methods on full reconstructions. Simultane-ously, it characterizes a posterior distribution over the gov-erning parameters to yield confidence estimates. LatentPDE establishes a bounded generative framework for inferring dynamic fields across space and time, making it suitable for any environment requiring safe generations, from structural health monitoring to climate resilience. 

2. Background 

2.1. PDE Solvers and the Inverse Problem 

PDEs describe the mathematical relationships governing complex physical systems. With known governing parame-ters and initial/boundary conditions, spatiotemporal states of the system can be inferred using forward solvers. For many PDEs, however, analytic solutions remain largely intractable. As such, many approaches must make use of discretization schemes such as Finite Element Method (FEM) (Felippa, 2004) and Finite Difference Method (FDM) (Thomas, 2013) to approximate these solutions numerically. Among these schemes, spectral methods provide an efficient mechanism by decomposing numerical solutions into a fi-nite expansion of global basis functions. Their core intuition relies on transforming differentiation to a simple operation on the associated coefficients, achieving high accuracy for smooth solutions with far fewer degrees of freedom than lo-cal discretization methods (Shen et al., 2011). Still, classical forward solvers require prior knowledge of the governing coefficients. In practice, we only have access to indirect and sparse observations, necessitating the solution to the 

inverse problem: inferring missing parameters from observa-tions. Because this inverse mapping is ill-posed and under-determined, spectral representations have been increasingly coupled with probabilistic frameworks to infer incomplete dynamics and forecast continuous fields (Lv et al., 2025; Arnst et al., 2013). 

2.2. Limitations of Existing Inverse Solvers 

One of the earliest methods to address the inverse problem was Tikhonov regularization (Tikhonov et al., 1943). Subse-quent approaches came in the form of variational Bayesian inference methods, which recast posterior inference as the optimization of a surrogate distribution within a chosen variational family (Stuart, 2010). In practice, two classes of methods have emerged for data assimilation (DA) in physical systems: variational approaches such as 4D-Var (Courtier & Talagrand, 1987), which optimize over a time window via adjoint methods but yield no posterior distri-bution, and ensemble methods such as the EnKF (Evensen, 1994; Iglesias et al., 2013), which propagate uncertainty through an ensemble-based linearization but struggle with non-Gaussian, high-dimensional state spaces. However, the inability of Bayesian approaches to scale or handle struc-tured missingness without strong parametric assumptions can make them vastly restrictive when compared to the flex-ibility of data-driven approaches. More recently, data-driven operator learning methods such as physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) (Raissi et al., 2019), Fourier Neural Operators (FNO) (Li et al., 2020), and DeepONet (Lu et al., 2019) have been used to learn complex prior structures. However, these architectures are fundamentally deterministic point estimators with no mech-anism for representing solution uncertainty. On the other hand, amortized approaches such as simulation-based infer-2Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

ence (Deistler et al., 2025) and neural posterior estimation (Ward et al., 2022) offer scalable posterior approximation, but do not exploit the structural regularity of the PDE solu-tion manifold. 

2.3. Generative Models and Latent Structures 

Diffusion models provide a solution to this need for uncer-tainty quantification. In many ways, they can be thought of as hierarchical VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013) which work by gradually adding noise to data samples in a forward Markov process. Once completely noised, a deep neural network learns to denoise the corrupted samples such that they can arbitrarily generate new samples consistent with the input distribution (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020). To reduce the computational overhead of standard diffusion models, recent approaches have shifted to latent formula-tions (Rombach et al., 2022). Yet, the question of imposing structure on learned latent spaces remains an open area of investigation under the field of disentanglement (Kim & Mnih, 2018; Hinz & Wermter, 2018; Wang et al., 2024), which seeks to find representations where individual dimen-sions correspond to interpretable generative factors. While approaches to impose physical guidance or simplify the problem in a compressed observation space exist, the for-mer is typically not strictly enforced (Bastek et al., 2024), and the latter is most often uninterpretable (Chefer et al., 2023), making the latent-to-observable mapping a black-box mechanism that cannot verify if solutions are physically consistent. 

3. Problem Setup 

We study the joint problem of sparse-observation recon-struction and super-resolution for fields governed by linear PDEs on the periodic unit square Ω = [0 , 1) 2. At inference time, the model receives only a sparse, noisy snapshot of a coarse output field y together with a low-resolution initial condition ulr  

> 0

. The goal is to find a physically-consistent latent representation that (i) recovers the governing coeffi-cients agnostic of noise or sparsity present in the observa-tions and (ii) allows for seamless upscaling to any desired resolution. 

3.1. Observation Model 

We work with a high-resolution grid of size Hhr ×Whr and a low-resolution grid obtained by average pooling with integer factor p. Let uhr out denote the high-resolution output field (the terminal state u(·, T ) for evolutionary PDEs). Sparse observations are drawn as 

y = M ⊙ Dp(uhr out ) + σobs M ⊙ ε, ε ∼ N (0 , I ), (1) where M ∈ { 0, 1}Hlr ×Wlr is a binary observation mask and 

Dp denotes average pooling. 

3.2. Latent Physical Parameterization 

Each candidate reconstruction is represented by a raw latent 

z = [ r1, r 2, r 3, q] ∈ R3+4 M 2force , (2) with three components. First, (r1, r 2, r 3) are mapped to physical coefficients θ via interval-constrained sigmoids, so the same latent geometry accommodates all families (Ap-pendix A). For our forcing term, we take inspiration from the spectral latent representations introduced by FNOs (Li et al., 2020). Here, q stores a compact low-mode Fourier representation of the steady forcing field. A further dis-cussion of this term is presented in Section 5.2. During inference, raw latents are normalized coordinate-wise using dataset statistics. 

3.3. PDE Families and Spectral Solver 

All PDE families in our experiments are linear, constant-coefficient, and periodic, so each spatial Fourier mode evolves independently. This yields a unified spectral transfer representation 

buout (k) = Gf(k, T ; θ) bu0(k) + Hf(k, T ; θ) bf (k), (3) where f indexes the PDE family, θ are its physical param-eters, and Gf, H f are family-specific transfer multipliers. Equation (3) is what allows us to use a single decoder to span multiple PDE types: recovering uout at any resolution reduces to inverting an FFT once the latent (θ, bf ) is known. The full forms of Gf and Hf for each particular family can be found in Appendix B. 

4. Methods 

Our framework introduces an approach to recovering a suitable latent variable z that, once decoded, corresponds to a physically and spectrally-consistent reconstruction of each observation y. Concretely, inference proceeds in three stages: an encoder E maps sparse observations (conditioned on the low-resolution initial condition) to an initial latent es-timate z0. Then a denoising process refines z0 toward a pos-terior sample z∗. Finally, the spectral decoder D maps z∗ to a high-resolution, physics-consistent output field. Schemati-cally: 

y | ulr 

> 0
> E

7→ z0

> denoising

−−−−−→ z∗ D

7→ uhr out . (4) Because D is fixed and differentiable across all methods, each encoder strategy reduces to the same structured inverse 3Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

problem of finding the z whose decoded field is consistent with the data under the objective 

J (z; y, M, u lr 0 , f) = M ⊙ D(z, u lr 0 ; f) − y 22

∥M ∥1 + ε . (5) We introduce two strategies for the encoder E: direct test-time optimization (L ATENT PDE-MAP) and amortized pre-diction (L ATENT PDE-E NC ). We use each as a warm-start initialization for a latent diffusion model that further im-proves upon the estimate and captures posterior uncertainty. This design cleanly separates the inference mechanism from the PDE solver. Thus, all performance differences among methods are attributable to how the latent is inferred, not to changes in the underlying physics. 

4.1. Conditioning Representation 

Before any encoding is done, the inference models first condition on sparse observations through a four-channel spatial representation consisting of the masked field y, the binary mask M , a distance-to-observation map d(M ), and a local observation-density map ρ(M ). Stacking these as y, M, d (M ), ρ (M ) lets the network distinguish unob-served zeros from true zero measurements and exposes the spatial structure of the sensor pattern, which is critical when test masks differ from those seen during training. A shared CNN sparse encoder processes this four-channel input into a fixed-size embedding cobs and a separate small CNN en-codes ulr 0 into cu0 . Full architectural details are shown in Appendix D. Both embeddings are passed to each of the two encoder strategies described below, which differ only in how they use the embeddings to produce a latent estimate. 

4.2. LatentPDE-MAP 

Maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimation recovers the most probable latent by directly minimizing a regularized version of Eq. (5) at test time, with no learned components beyond the decoder itself. For each test sample we solve 

zMAP = arg min  

> z

J (z; y, M, u lr 0 , f) + λMAP ∥z∥22, (6) with λMAP = 0 .01 . Because the masked residual is non-convex and can harbor local minima under very sparse masks, we run 300 Adam steps from three independent random initializations and retain the restart with the lowest masked residual. MAP requires no training data and is guar-anteed to fit the observations, but its per-sample optimiza-tion is slower than amortized alternatives. L ATENT PDE-ENC trades this flexibility for near-instant inference. 

4.3. LatentPDE-Enc 

Rather than optimizing per-sample, the amortized encoder 

Eψ predicts the latent in a single forward pass: 

ˆzenc = Eψ (y, M, u lr 0 ), (7) where Eψ is a three-layer MLP that fuses cobs and cu0 , and is trained end-to-end through the fixed decoder with 

Lenc = J (ˆ zenc ; y, M, u lr 0 , f) + λenc ∥ˆzenc ∥22, (8) where λenc = 0.01 . Training details are given in Ap-pendix D. While amortization yields fast inference, by itself the encoder may generalize poorly to unseen mask patterns during training, hence the need for a diffusion framework to refine this initialization. 

4.4. Latent Diffusion Models 

We train denoising diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) in nor-malized latent space (Rombach et al., 2022) to learn a prior over physically-consistent latents and to provide calibrated uncertainty. The forward (noising) process follows a linear variance schedule over T = 400 steps: 

q(zt | z0) = N √¯αt z0, (1 − ¯αt)I. (9) The denoiser ϵϕ takes as input the noisy latent, the condi-tioning representation [cobs , cu0 ], and a sinusoidal timestep embedding. These are injected into a six-block residual MLP via FiLM modulation (Perez et al., 2018). We train two models with identical architecture but different target la-tent distributions: L ATENT PDE-MAP uses latents {z(i)MAP }

obtained by running the MAP objective on each training sample, while L ATENT PDE-E NC uses encoder predictions 

{ˆz(i)enc }.The training loss augments the standard denoising objective with an observation-consistency term weighted by ¯αt to emphasize cleaner timesteps: 

Ldiff = Ldenoise + λobs Lobs , (10) 

Lobs = Et

h

¯αt J (ˆ z0; y, M, u lr 0 , f)

i

, (11) where ˆz0 is the clean-latent prediction derived from the denoiser output. As in the standard denoising objective, the expectation over t is estimated by sampling diffusion timesteps uniformly during minibatch training. This trains the same denoiser to form usable clean-latent estimates across the whole noising schedule rather than at a single selected noise level. ¯αt downweights the decoded physical residual at high-noise timesteps, where the clean latent esti-mate divides by a small √¯αt and is therefore less reliable. Conditioning is then dropped with probability 0.1 during training for robustness (Ho & Salimans, 2021). 4Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Figure 2. Full-field reconstruction of PDEs from sparse ( s = 5 .0% ) and noisy ( σ = 0 .15 ) observations. Note that LatentPDE is conditioned here on the low-resolution initial state ( u0) shown, demonstrating simultaneous super-resolution and reconstruction functionality, whereas other baselines require a high-resolution u0 (not pictured). Despite this, LatentPDE consistently achieves the highest fidelity, reducing RMSE by over 87% compared to EnKF (Helmholtz) and up to 73% relative to the next-best performing method (PINNs, Klein–Gordon). By addressing measurement noise and incomplete coverage, LatentPDE successfully reconstructs the full physical solutions without sacrificing complex spatial dynamics. 

4.5. Posterior Sampling with Physics Guidance 

At test time the reverse chain begins from a noisy perturba-tion of the conditioning-specific initialization zMAP or ˆzenc .Ensemble diversity is induced by varying the injected noise level σinit ∈ [0 .3, 0.6] across members. Because the denoiser is only approximately conditioned on observations, we apply physics guidance (Chung et al., 2023) at each reverse step for t < 0.8 T . The predicted clean latent ˆz0 is refined by clipped gradient descent on the masked residual, 

ˆz0 ← ˆz0 − ηg γg clip  ∇ˆz0 J (ˆ z0), −5, 5, (12) with ηg = 0 .10 , γg = 80 , and 3 inner steps per reverse tran-sition. After the chain completes, an optional 20 -step Adam refinement minimizes J (z) + λref ∥z − zdiff ∥22 to reduce residual mismatch while staying anchored to the diffusion output. The full procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1, and an ablation study of inference-time adjustments can be found in Appendix K. 

5. Experimental Results 

All models were trained and all experiments were run on a single NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPU. 

5.1. Data and Mask Generation 

We generate synthetic inverse-problem pairs by first sam-pling a high-resolution initial condition uhr 0 , then drawing regime-specific PDE parameters and forcing coefficients, and solving the corresponding PDE with a spectral solver to obtain the high-resolution target uhr 

> out

. To construct the 

Algorithm 1 Posterior sampling with physics guidance 

1: Input: observations y, mask M , IC ulr 0 , denoiser ϵϕ,PDE family f

2: Compute zinit via MAP or encoder 

3: Sample zTinit as noisy perturbation of zinit at level σinit 

4: for t = Tinit , . . . , 0 do 

5: Predict ˆϵt = ϵϕ(zt, y, M, u lr 0 , t/T ); form ˆz0

6: if t < 0.8 T then 

7: Update ˆz0 via physics guidance (Eq. 12, 3 steps) 

8: end if 

9: DDPM reverse step → zt−1

10: end for 

11: (Optional) Refine z0 via Adam on J (z0) + λref ∥z0 −

zdiff ∥22

12: Return D(z0, u out 0 )

low-resolution counterpart, we average-pool uhr 0 to ulr 0 and solve the same PDE on the low-resolution grid, yielding 

ulr 

> out

. Sparse observations are obtained by masking ulr  

> out

and adding Gaussian noise only at observed locations. The benchmark comprises six regimes spanning three PDE families, whose functional forms can be found in Table 2. Four regimes correspond to distinct parameter subregimes of advection–diffusion, while the remaining two instantiate the Klein–Gordon and Helmholtz families. Each regime specifies a PDE family, parameter ranges, and the standard deviation used to sample latent forcing coefficients. Full regime details are provided in Table 3. For each sample we construct a binary observation mask on the low-resolution grid with a prescribed sparsity 0 < s ≤ 1.The training pipeline uses four mask types with sample-wise 5Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity                                                                             

> Table 1. Comparison of different models across PDE families. For 3D-Var and EnKF, we report the better result between the MAP and encoder initial priors, chosen by the lowest aggregate RMSE in each setting. MAE is reported for deterministic point estimates, and CRPS for probabilistic predictions. A lower value is more desirable for all metrics listed.
> Advection–Diffusion Klein–Gordon Helmholtz Method RMSE PSD MAE CRPS RMSE PSD MAE CRPS RMSE PSD MAE CRPS LatentPDE-MAP (Ours) 0.128 2.442 –0.087 0.601 3.952 –0.388 0.088 3.628 –0.071 LatentPDE-Enc (Ours) 0.103 1.570 –0.056 0.743 4.042 –0.458 0.052 3.433 –0.025
> EnKF 0.134 10.819 –0.104 0.626 3.736 –0.484 0.044 7.474 –0.031 3D-Var 0.112 7.322 0.104 –0.605 3.554 0.507 –0.038 4.265 0.028 –PINN 0.170 7.767 0.137 –0.732 6.113 0.573 –0.083 5.662 0.071 –
> Table 2. Summary of 2D homogeneous governing PDEs. Note that our experiments include an additional source term.

Equation Name Formulation 

Advection–Diffusion ut + v · ∇ u = κ∆u

Klein–Gordon utt − c2∇2u + m2u = 0 

Helmholtz −κ∇2u + k2u = u0

sparsity drawn uniformly from a range, while evaluation additionally uses structured OOD masks. Sample masks can be viewed in Appendix E.1. 

5.2. Spectral Forcing Representation 

All three PDE families include an unknown spatially-varying, time-independent source term f : Ω → R. Rather than learning or optimizing a forcing value at every grid point, we represent it by a truncated set of low-frequency Fourier coefficients. Specifically, we retain the Kf × Kf

lowest-wavenumber block of the two-dimensional real FFT, split into positive and negative row-frequency bands and stored as real and imaginary parts separately, yielding a forcing sub-vector qf ∈ R4K2 

> f

. At decode time, qf is zero-padded into an H × (W/ 2 + 1) half-spectrum and inverted via an inverse FFT to produce f at the target resolution. This design has two consequences. First, the forcing is 

resolution-transferable by construction, meaning that the same latent vector decodes to a physically consistent f at any output grid size. This is because zero-padding a trun-cated spectrum is equivalent to ideal band-limited interpo-lation. Second, limiting inference to Kf modes acts as an implicit low-frequency prior on the source term, which pre-vents the latent from overfitting high-frequency observation noise. For a more mathematical explanation of the forcing term, we refer the reader to Appendix E.3. 

5.3. Experimental Setup 

Unless otherwise noted, models are trained exclusively within their own PDE family and results are reported sep-arately for each class. Each regime contributes 5000 syn-thetic training examples. Training uses four different masks with s ∼ U [0 .01 , 0.15] , while evaluation fixes s = 5% . We evaluate 500 test instances per regime. For LatentPDE, we draw 12 posterior samples per test case (a discussion of how this number was derived can be found in Appendix F.1) and use the ensemble mean as the reconstruction. An important note in evaluating the performance of our framework lies in the choice between L ATENT PDE-MAP and L ATENT PDE-E NC . To account for the fact that in any realistic scenario we would not have access to the ground truth of the test set, we first compute the error on each PDE family using a separate validation set. Then, we select the variant with the lower validation error to use for the entirety of the held-out test set. Consequently, in any future refer-ence to LatentPDE in our plots, it refers to the initialization mode that had the lower validation error. A full discussion of our setup can be found in Appendix F.2. 

5.4. Baselines 

We consider four primary baselines: two standard data assimilation techniques, 3D-Var (Lorenc, 1986) and the Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) (Evensen, 1994), which analogously deal with incomplete data and reconstruction, the well-known broader framework of PINNs (Raissi et al., 2019), and a more recent state-of-the-art generative model FunDPS (Yao et al., 2025). To briefly explain the methodological differences between these baselines, 3D-Var combines prior knowledge usually referred to as the background with known observations to obtain the optimal state or prediction of a field variable through a deterministic optimization problem. It relies on assumptions of Gaussian error distributions and isotropic background covariances (Barker et al., 2003; Weaver & Courtier, 2001). As a probabilistic counterpart, EnKF uti-lizes a Monte Carlo approach, propagating an ensemble of model states forward to dynamically estimate background error covariances rather than relying on static assumptions (Katzfuss et al., 2016). Note that we test both MAP and encoder intializations as the background state for 3D-Var & 6Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity  

> Figure 3. Comparison of LatentPDE and FunDPS reconstructions. FunDPS was trained on the same 20000 samples of advection–diffusion data as our model. Error distributions and spectral alignment curves over 500 samples are shown on the left. Top and bottom row show different individual reconstructions of radial and grid mask respectively.

EnKF methods, then report the one yielding the lowest Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). PINNs use PDE residuals as regularizers within a composite loss function and softly con-strain the network towards physically valid states. FunDPS uses a joint formulation of solution and coefficient spaces to solve forward and inverse problems using a functional space extension of diffusion models guided by PDE constraints. For most of the baselines, there is no direct analogue to converting low-resolution inputs to high-resolution outputs as LatentPDE can. To accommodate this structural differ-ence and ensure a competitive comparison, we supply the baseline methods with high-resolution inputs. While we recognize that FunDPS has upsampling capabilities, we also provide it with high-resolution data to remain consis-tent with other baselines. In contrast, LatentPDE operates strictly with low-resolution, sparse observations and the initial condition. We report RMSE for pointwise accuracy and Power Spectral Density (PSD) log error to measure the recovery of multi-scale spatial frequencies (Sinclair & Pegram, 2005; Harris et al., 2001). For probabilistic poste-rior samplers, we report the Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS) to assess uncertainty calibration against noise, and analogously the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for deter-ministic models. Additional details on metrics can be found in Appendix F.3. 

5.5. Sparse Reconstruction 

We present the reconstruction results of LatentPDE bench-marked against traditional methods like EnKF, 3D-Var, and PINNs. As shown in Figure 2, LatentPDE is able to achieve the lowest RMSE across the board and qualitatively captures much of the finer-scale details present in the ground truth. While some of the baselines produce visually smooth fields, like in the PINN prediction for the advection–diffusion sce-nario, this over-regularization represents a failure to capture the true underlying physics. On the other hand, EnKF ex-hibits high-frequency artifacts, showing signs of aggressive over-fitting to the local noisy observation points. A fuller collection of metrics can be found in Table 1. Over-all, LatentPDE consistently surpasses other high-resolution baselines in matching the spectral characteristics of the ground truth fields, reflected in substantially lower PSD errors. Likewise, the framework reveals robust uncertainty quantification against injected noise as verified through the superior CRPS values. Because the DA methods share the same initializations as LatentPDE, these metrics provide further justification that the diffusion process plays a non-trivial role in refining the approximation. Instead of relying purely on a strong initial guess, LatentPDE is actively us-ing the posterior to resolve fine-scale physical features that traditional DA methods cannot.  

> Figure 4. Radially averaged PSD across advection–diffusion sub-regimes and mask configurations. LatentPDE matches the ground truth energy even at the sharp high-frequency cutoff, whereas the baselines suffer from spectral bias.

To visually illustrate the spectral alignment with ground truth, Figure 4 plots the PSD curve for the four subregimes of the advection–diffusion equation. PSD intuitively mea-sures how a field’s variance is distributed across spatial scales ( k), and therefore acts as a rigorous metric for struc-tural realism. In analyzing the PSD of our reconstruction 7Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

against that of the ground truth, we show that LatentPDE is successfully filtering out the injected noise and simultane-ously recovering the lost sub-grid physical structures. Moreover, we compare the reconstruction of LatentPDE with FunDPS for the inverse problem of the advection– diffusion equation on two distinct OOD masks with s = 5% 

and σ = 0 .15 in Figure 3. We demonstrate lower and tighter RMSE distribution compared to the noisy artifacts produced by FunDPS. The radial PSD on the bottom left further confirms this structural advantage. LatentPDE is much more aligned with the spectral decay of the ground truth, whereas FunDPS exhibits non-physical spectral en-ergy across wavenumbers. A breakdown of runtimes for all models are provided in Appendix L. 

5.6. Uncertainty Quantification 

We can gain deeper insights into the robustness of the model by investigating the distribution of our generative outputs. As such, Figure 5 visualizes the ensemble mean reconstruc-tion from LatentPDE along with uncertainty plots. Here, the standard deviation fields provide a spatial map of posterior spread, highlighting regions where the reconstruction is less certain. s = 5.0%, = 0.15           

> Sparse Observations Ground Truth
> RMSE = 0.0447
> Posterior Mean Absolute Error Uncertainty Std.
> s= 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.1735
> s= 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0123 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> 0.30
> Absolute error / uncertainty std.
> Advection-Diffusion Klein-Gordon Helmholtz

Figure 5. Ensemble mean and uncertainty quantification for Latent-PDE across our three governing equations. The rightmost columns demonstrate that the generated uncertainty standard deviation maps spatially correlate to regions of elevated absolute error. 

Figure 6. Metric distributions for RMSE and PSD for all sub-regimes of the advection–diffusion equation. 

These high-uncertainty regions coincide qualitatively with larger absolute errors, indicating that the posterior ensemble captures meaningful localized failure modes under sparse conditioning. Beyond these spatial insights, encoding physi-cal coefficients into our latents provides a restriction upon the solution space. As shown in Figure 6, this results in tighter error bounds and better spectral fidelity than conven-tional methods when aggregated across multiple runs. 

6. Discussion 

A key takeaway from these evaluations is the distinct roles played by L ATENT PDE-MAP and L ATENT PDE-E NC .LATENT PDE-MAP initializes directly against the masked residual of the test sample, and is therefore aligned with given observations but blind to the broader training distribu-tion. On the contrary, L ATENT PDE-E NC initializes using an amortized prediction. This makes it so that regularities learned across the training set can be exploited to provide a better starting basis. Depending on the problem setup, either method may yield more favorable reconstructions. For example, when the inverse problem is severely under-determined, the encoder’s learned inductive bias allows the model to make predictions with assumptions inherited from the training data. Yet, when the observations are already informative enough, the encoder can introduce an unwanted bias, making MAP a better choice. In cases where the poste-rior is well captured by the data, both initializations provide valid guesses and yield similar results. To summarize, neither strategy dominates unconditionally. Their relative performance reflects how much information the observations carry relative to the prior, and how well the training distribution covers the test geometry. 

7. Conclusion 

In this work, we propose LatentPDE, a comprehensive framework for inverting the unknown coefficients of a gov-erning PDE from sparse, noisy, and low-resolution obser-vations. This is accomplished by enforcing physics within an interpretable latent space and a coupled spectral solver. We demonstrate improved structural realism via power spec-tral densities and reduced error. While LatentPDE yields promising results for linear PDEs, we intend to expand the framework to handle nonlinear dynamics with non-periodic boundary conditions and irregular domains. Another limita-tion is the inability to address equifinality , wherein multiple distinct sets of coefficients can yield similarly plausible re-constructions for a given sparse input. Future works could condition upon multiple timesteps rather than a single snap-shot to address this. Additionally, our reliance on a spectral solver as a decoder restricts the framework to smooth so-lutions. Thus, developing a more general decoder to accu-rately capture these abrupt dynamics is of interest to explore. 8Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Impact Statement 

This work advances our ability to accurately model complex physical systems even when observational data is highly deficient in quality and/or quantity. Broadly, it can be used for the democratization of high-fidelity predictive modeling in under-resourced areas, especially in applications such as disaster management and extreme weather forecasting. However, as with any latent space framework, there remains an ethical need to maintain transparency about the under-lying physical constraints and ensure that users understand the uncertainty bounds of generated results to prevent over-confident decision-making. 

References 

Arnst, M., Soize, C., and Ghanem, R. Hybrid sam-pling/spectral method for solving stochastic coupled prob-lems. SIAM/ASA Journal on Uncertainty Quantification ,1(1):218–243, 2013. Baldan, M., Di Barba, P., and Lowther, D. A. Physics-informed neural networks for inverse electromagnetic problems. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics , 59(5):1–5, 2023. doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2023.3247023. Barker, D., Huang, W., Guo, Y.-R., and Bourgeois, A. A three-dimensional variational (3dvar) data assimilation system for use with mm5. NCAR Tech Note , 68, 2003. Bastek, J.-H., Sun, W., and Kochmann, D. M. Physics-informed diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14404 , 2024. Burgers, G., van Leeuwen, P. J., and Evensen, G. Analysis scheme in the ensemble Kalman filter. Monthly Weather Review , 126(6):1719–1724, 1998. Chefer, H., Lang, O., Geva, M., Polosukhin, V., Shocher, A., Irani, M., Mosseri, I., and Wolf, L. The hidden language of diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00966 ,2023. Chung, H., Kim, J., Mccann, M. T., Klasky, M. L., and Ye, J. C. Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy in-verse problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Courtier, P. and Talagrand, O. Variational assimilation of meteorological observations with the adjoint vortic-ity equation. ii: Numerical results. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 113(478):1329– 1347, 1987. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.49711347813. URL https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley. com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.49711347813 .Deistler, M., Boelts, J., Steinbach, P., Moss, G., Moreau, T., Gloeckler, M., Rodrigues, P. L., Linhart, J., Lappalainen, J. K., Miller, B. K., et al. Simulation-based inference: A practical guide. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.12939 , 2025. Evensen, G. Sequential data assimilation with a nonlinear quasi-geostrophic model using monte carlo methods to forecast error statistics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans , 99(C5):10143–10162, 1994. Felippa, C. A. Introduction to finite element methods. Uni-versity of Colorado , 885, 2004. Gao, H., Sun, L., and Wang, J.-X. Super-resolution and denoising of fluid flow using physics-informed convo-lutional neural networks without high-resolution labels. 

Physics of Fluids , 33(7), 2021. Harris, D., Foufoula-Georgiou, E., Droegemeier, K. K., and Levit, J. J. Multiscale statistical properties of a high-resolution precipitation forecast. Journal of Hydrometeorology , 2(4):406 – 418, 2001. doi: 10. 1175/1525-7541(2001)002 ⟨0406:MSPOAH ⟩2.0.CO;2. URL https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/ journals/hydr/2/4/1525-7541_2001_002_ 0406_mspoah_2_0_co_2.xml .Hinz, T. and Wermter, S. Inferencing based on unsupervised learning of disentangled representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.02627 , 2018. Ho, J. and Salimans, T. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications , 2021. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. Denoising diffusion proba-bilistic models. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. Huang, D. Z., Nelsen, N. H., and Trautner, M. An operator learning perspective on parameter-to-observable maps. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06031 , 2024. Iglesias, M. A., Law, K. J., and Stuart, A. M. Ensemble kalman methods for inverse problems. Inverse Problems ,29(4):045001, 2013. Kashinath, K., Mustafa, M., Albert, A., Wu, J.-L., Jiang, C., Esmaeilzadeh, S., Azizzadenesheli, K., Wang, R., Chattopadhyay, A., Singh, A., et al. Physics-informed machine learning: case studies for weather and climate modelling. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soci-ety A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences ,379(2194), 2021. Katzfuss, M., Stroud, J. R., and Wikle, C. K. Understanding the ensemble kalman filter. The American Statistician , 70 (4):350–357, 2016. 9Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Kim, H. and Mnih, A. Disentangling by factorising. In 

International conference on machine learning , pp. 2649– 2658. PMLR, 2018. Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. Kovachki, N., Li, Z., Liu, B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Bhat-tacharya, K., Stuart, A., and Anandkumar, A. Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with applications to pdes. Journal of Machine Learning Re-search , 24(89):1–97, 2023. Li, Z., Kovachki, N., Azizzadenesheli, K., Liu, B., Bhat-tacharya, K., Stuart, A., and Anandkumar, A. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equa-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 , 2020. Lorenc, A. C. Analysis methods for numerical weather prediction. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 112(474):1177–1194, 1986. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qj.49711247414. URL https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley. com/doi/abs/10.1002/qj.49711247414 .Lu, L., Jin, P., and Karniadakis, G. E. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of opera-tors. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03193 , 2019. Lv, C., Song, N., Nie, J., Ye, M., Liang, X., Jia, D., and Ni, X. Hybrid wave height forecasting via integrated physics-based simulation and data-driven correction with contrastive feature fusion. Applied Ocean Research , 162: 104729, 2025. Perez, E., Strub, F., De Vries, H., Dumoulin, V., and Courville, A. Film: Visual reasoning with a general con-ditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32, 2018. Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., and Karniadakis, G. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning frame-work for solving forward and inverse problems involv-ing nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 378:686–707, 2019. ISSN 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10. 045. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0021999118307125 .Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-ference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 10684–10695, 2022. Shen, J., Tang, T., and Wang, L.-L. Spectral methods: algo-rithms, analysis and applications , volume 41. Springer Science & Business Media, 2011. Sinclair, S. and Pegram, G. Empirical mode decomposi-tion in 2-d space and time: a tool for space-time rainfall analysis and nowcasting. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences , 9(3):127–137, 2005. Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N., and Ganguli, S. Deep unsupervised learning using nonequi-librium thermodynamics. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 2256–2265. pmlr, 2015. Stuart, A. M. Inverse problems: A bayesian perspec-tive. Acta Numerica , 19:451–559, 2010. doi: 10.1017/ S0962492910000061. Thomas, J. W. Numerical partial differential equations: finite difference methods , volume 22. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. Tikhonov, A. N. et al. On the stability of inverse problems. In Dokl. akad. nauk sssr , volume 39, pp. 195–198, 1943. Wang, X., Chen, H., Tang, S., Wu, Z., and Zhu, W. Dis-entangled representation learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 46(12): 9677–9696, 2024. Ward, D., Cannon, P., Beaumont, M., Fasiolo, M., and Schmon, S. Robust neural posterior estimation and sta-tistical model criticism. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:33845–33859, 2022. Weaver, A. and Courtier, P. Correlation modelling on the sphere using a generalized diffusion equation. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society , 127(575): 1815–1846, 2001. Yao, J., Mammadov, A., Berner, J., Kerrigan, G., Ye, J. C., Azizzadenesheli, K., and Anandkumar, A. Guided dif-fusion sampling on function spaces with applications to pdes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17004 , 2025. Zheng, H., Huang, Y., Huang, Z., Hao, W., and Lin, G. Hompinns: Homotopy physics-informed neural networks for solving the inverse problems of nonlinear differential equations with multiple solutions. Journal of computa-tional physics , 500:112751, 2024. 10 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Appendix A. Latent Parameterization Details 

The first three raw latent coordinates (r1, r 2, r 3) are mapped to family-specific physical parameters via interval-constrained sigmoids: 

θj = af,j + ( bf,j − af,j ) σ(rj ), j = 1 , 2, 3, (13) where σ(·) is the logistic sigmoid and [( af,j , b f,j )] 3 

> j=1

are family-specific parameter bounds. The three coordinates decode to (vx, v y , κ ) for advection–diffusion, (cx, c y , m ) for Klein–Gordon, and (κx, κ y , k ) for Helmholtz. During inference, raw latents are normalized coordinate-wise as 

z = zraw − μσ , (14) where (μ, σ) are branch-specific statistics computed over the training set. 

B. Additional Details on Problem Setup 

All implemented PDE families fit the general operator form 

Pf,θ (Dt, ∇) u = Bf,θ [u0] + f, (15) where Pf,θ is a linear constant-coefficient space-time differential operator and Bf,θ encodes initial-condition dependence. For evolutionary families this is posed on Ω × [0 , T ]; for Helmholtz it is a static boundary-value problem on Ω.Because every family is linear, constant-coefficient, and periodic, spatial Fourier modes decouple and each evolves via scalar transfer multipliers Gf(k, T ; θ) and Hf(k, T ; θ) as in Eq. (3). The family-specific forms are as follows. 

Advection–Diffusion. With velocity (vx, v y ) and diffusivity κ, i.e. θ = ( vx, v y , κ ):

Gf(k, T ; θ) = exp  −  2πi (kxvx + ky vy ) + 4 π2κ|k|2 T  , (16) 

Hf(k, T ; θ) = Gf(k, T ; θ) − 1

− (2 πi (kxvx + ky vy ) + 4 π2κ|k|2) , (17) with Hf = T when the denominator vanishes. 

Klein–Gordon. With wave speeds (cx, c y ) and mass m, i.e. θ = ( cx, c y , m ), defining ω2 = 4 π2(c2

> x

k2 

> x

+ c2 

> y

k2 

> y

) + m2:

Gf(k, T ; θ) = cos( ωT ), (18) 

Hf(k, T ; θ) = sin( ωT )

ω . (19) 

Helmholtz. With anisotropic diffusivities (κx, κ y ) and wavenumber k, i.e. θ = ( κx, κ y , k ):

Gf(k; θ) = 0 , (20) 

Hf(k; θ) = −14π2(κxk2 

> x

+ κy k2 

> y

) − k2 , (21) so the output depends only on the forcing (no time dependence). A full derivation of each of these can be found in Section C. 

C. PDE Families and Spectral Derivations 

This section derives the family-agnostic operator formulation to the three PDE families that we study and formalizes the exact spectral transfer functions used by the decoder. 11 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

C.1. General Fourier Reduction of Linear Periodic Operator Families 

Let x = ( x, y ) ∈ T2. Any sufficiently regular periodic field admits the Fourier expansion 

u(x, t ) = X

> n∈Z2

bun(t) e2πi n·x. (22) Equivalently, if we define the physical wavevector k = 2 πn = ( kx, k y ), then the spatial derivatives act on each Fourier mode by 

d∂xu(k, t ) = ik x bu(k, t ), d∂y u(k, t ) = ik y bu(k, t ), (23) and more generally 

\∂α1 

> x

∂α2 

> y

u(k, t ) = ( ik x)α1 (ik y )α2 bu(k, t ). (24) Suppose 

Pf,θ (Dt, ∇) = 

> mmax

X

> m=0

X

> |α|≤ r

c(f)

> m,α

(θ) ∂mt ∂α1 

> x

∂α2 

> y

, α = ( α1, α 2), (25) with coefficients independent of (x, t ). Applying the spatial Fourier transform to Eq. (15) yields, mode by mode, 

> mmax

X

> m=0

p(f) 

> m

(k; θ) dm

dt m bu(k, t ) = bbf(k, t ; u0, θ) + bf (k), (26) where 

p(f) 

> m

(k; θ) = X

> |α|≤ r

c(f)

> m,α

(θ) ( ik x)α1 (ik y )α2 . (27) Thus every spatial mode decouples. In the study, the resulting modewise problem is either (1) a first-order scalar ODE (advection–diffusion), (2) a second-order scalar ODE (Klein–Gordon), or (3) an algebraic equation (Helmholtz family). This decoupling is the reason we are able to use a single FFT-based solve interface without changing the rest of the inference stack. 

C.2. Advection–Diffusion Family 

The advection–diffusion family is 

∂tu(x, t ) + v · ∇ u(x, t ) = κ∆u(x, t ) + f (x), v = ( vx, v y ), κ > 0, (28) with coefficient vector θAD = ( vx, v y , κ ), with initial condition u(x, 0) = u0(x) and periodic boundary conditions. Fourier transforming in space gives 

∂t bu(k, t ) + i(vxkx + vy ky )bu(k, t ) = −κ(k2 

> x

+ k2 

> y

)bu(k, t ) + bf (k), (29) or equivalently 

∂t bu(k, t ) = λAD (k) bu(k, t ) + bf (k), (30) with mode symbol 

λAD (k) = −i(vxkx + vy ky ) − κ(k2 

> x

+ k2 

> y

). (31) Equation (30) is a scalar affine ODE. Using the integrating factor e−λAD (k)t,

ddt 

h

e−λAD (k)t bu(k, t )

i

= e−λAD (k)t bf (k). (32) Integrating from 0 to T and using bu(k, 0) = bu0(k) gives 

bu(k, T ) = eλAD (k)T bu0(k) + 

Z T

> 0

eλAD (k)( T −s) ds 

!bf (k). (33) 12 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Evaluating the integral yields 

bu(k, T ) = eλAD (k)T bu0(k) + eλAD (k)T − 1

λAD (k) bf (k). (34) Hence the family-specific spectral transfer functions are 

GAD (k, T ; θAD ) = eλAD (k)T , HAD (k, T ; θAD ) = eλAD (k)T − 1

λAD (k) . (35) At λAD (k) = 0 , the forcing transfer function is defined by continuity: 

lim 

> λ→0

eλT − 1

λ = T. (36) The implementation applies this limiting value near zero to avoid numerical instability at very small denominators. We note that this is an exact continuous limit of the mode-wise transfer function and therefore preserves the mathematical definition of the decoder. 

C.3. Klein–Gordon Family 

The Klein–Gordon family is given by 

∂tt u(x, t ) − c2

> x

∂xx u(x, t ) − c2 

> y

∂yy u(x, t ) + m2u(x, t ) = f (x), (37) with coefficient vector θKG (cx, c y , m ), and initial displacement and velocity 

u(x, 0) = u0(x), ∂tu(x, 0) = 0 . (38) The zero-velocity choice is a modeling decision induced by the current latent state, which stores only one initial field rather than an initial displacement-velocity pair. Fourier transforming Eq. (37) yields 

∂tt bu(k, t ) + ωKG (k)2 bu(k, t ) = bf (k), (39) where 

ωKG (k)2 = c2

> x

k2 

> x

+ c2 

> y

k2 

> y

+ m2. (40) Equation (39) is a forced harmonic oscillator for each spatial mode. The homogeneous solution is then given by 

buh(k, t ) = A(k) cos  ωKG (k)t + B(k) sin  ωKG (k)t. (41) Because the forcing is time-independent, a particular solution is 

bup(k, t ) = bf (k)

ωKG (k)2 . (42) Hence 

bu(k, t ) = A(k) cos  ωKG (k)t + B(k) sin  ωKG (k)t + bf (k)

ωKG (k)2 . (43) Imposing the initial conditions gives 

A(k) = bu0(k) − bf (k)

ωKG (k)2 , B(k) = 0 , (44) and therefore 

bu(k, T ) = cos  ωKG (k)T bu0(k) + 1 − cos  ωKG (k)T 

ωKG (k)2 bf (k). (45) 13 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Thus 

GKG (k, T ; θKG ) = cos  ωKG (k)T , HKG (k, T ; θKG ) = 1 − cos  ωKG (k)T 

ωKG (k)2 . (46) When ωKG (k) is very small, the forcing transfer function is again replaced by its limiting value: 

lim 

> ω→0

1 − cos( ωT )

ω2 = T 2

2 . (47) We note that this limit again preserves the mathematical definition of the decoder. Although the default parameter ranges keep m bounded away from zero, our implementation retains this limit for numerical robustness. 

C.4. Helmholtz Family 

The Helmholtz family is a static equation of the form 

−κx∂xx u(x) − κy ∂yy u(x) + k2u(x) = u0(x) + f (x), (48) with coefficient vector θH = ( κx, κ y , k ), with periodic boundary conditions. This is an anisotropic forced Helmholtz form in which the supplied initial condition appears on the right-hand side as a static source term. Applying the spatial Fourier transform gives the algebraic relation 

κxk2 

> x

+ κy k2 

> y

+ k2 bu(k) = bu0(k) + bf (k). (49) Therefore 

bu(k) = bu0(k) + bf (k)

κxk2 

> x

+ κy k2 

> y

+ k2 . (50) In the notation of Eq. (3), 

GH(k; θH) = 1

κxk2 

> x

+ κy k2 

> y

+ k2 , HH(k; θH) = 1

κxk2 

> x

+ κy k2 

> y

+ k2 . (51) Because κx, κ y , k > 0, the denominator is strictly positive and the solve is well posed at every Fourier mode, including the zero mode. 

D. Architecture Details 

Sparse observation encoder. A four-channel input [y, M, d (M ), ρ (M )] is processed by a six-layer CNN (channels 

4 → 64 → 128 → 256 , two stride-2 convolutions, GroupNorm + GELU throughout) followed by global average pooling and a two-layer MLP, yielding cobs ∈ R256 . This module is instantiated separately but with the same architecture in both the inference encoder and the denoiser. 

Inference encoder. The encoder concatenates [cobs , cu0 ] and passes through a four-layer MLP (hidden dim 512 , Layer-Norm + GELU) projecting to Rdz . This is trained for 400 epochs. 

Diffusion denoiser. The noisy latent zt is projected to hidden dim 512 and passed through six residual blocks (Linear + LayerNorm + GELU), each conditioned via a FiLM layer (Perez et al., 2018) on c = [ cobs , cu0 , ct] ∈ R512 , where ct is a sinusoidal timestep embedding projected through a two-layer MLP. A final linear layer maps back to Rdz . This is trained for 600 epochs. 

E. Synthetic Data Generation 

Synthetic data are generated separately for each regime, where a regime specifies a PDE family, three parameter ranges, and a forcing scale. Let uhr 0 ∈ RH×W denote the high-resolution initial condition on the unit square. 14 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity fourier fronts dipoles multiscale 

Figure 7. Representative initial conditions used in our study. These were chosen to provide challenging initial states with diverse spatial regularity and frequency content. 

Initial conditions. Initial conditions are generated in the following four ways: broadband random Fourier field, sharp transition fronts, localized vortex dipoles, and multiscale Gaussian-Fourier fields. All initial conditions are standardized to zero mean and unit variance. Sample visualizations of each of these can be found in Figure 7. 

Parameter and forcing sampling. Given regime r, each of the three physical coefficients is sampled independently from a regime-specific interval [ℓ(r) 

> j

, u (r) 

> j

]. We first draw ξj ∼ U (0 , 1) and store a raw latent coordinate 

zj = log ξj

1 − ξj

, (52) then decode 

θj = ℓ(r) 

> j

+  u(r) 

> j

− ℓ(r)

> j

σ(zj ), (53) so that θj is uniform on [ℓ(r) 

> j

, u (r) 

> j

]. When forcing is enabled, the latent forcing coefficients are sampled i.i.d. Gaussian with regime-specific standard deviation τr .

E.1. Mask Generation 

For each sample, a binary mask is generated on the low-resolution grid. Let Hlr × Wlr denote the LR resolution and let 

nobs = max(1 , ⌊sH lr Wlr ⌋) , (54) where s is the observation fraction. The implemented mask generators are: random, clustered, line, corners, grid, boundary, radial, and single patch. In the training pipeline, s ∼ U [smin , s max ] with [smin , s max ] = [0 .01 , 0.15] and the mask type is drawn from the first four masks listed. At evaluation time, s is fixed and the mask type is drawn from the last four masks listed. The masks are visualized in Figure 8. Training       

> random clustered line corners
> Test
> grid boundary radial single_patch

Figure 8. Sample masks of each type at a fixed 5.0% sparsity. The top row denotes the masks used for training and the bottom row denotes the masks used during inference. 

15 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

E.2. Regime Ranges 

In this section we provide the parameter ranges for each of our study regimes in Table 3. Note that for the advection–diffusion subregimes, the domains are determined by the P´ eclet number, defined as 

Pe = U L κ =

L

q

v2 

> x

+ v2

> y

κ , (55) where U = ∥v∥ is the characteristic speed, and L is the characteristic length scale (which for Ω = [0 , 1) 2, is just L = 1 ). The reason for this distinction is that each subregime has drastically different evolution patterns. 

Table 3. Regime definitions used in our experiments. The first four regimes are subregimes of advection–diffusion; the final two correspond to Klein–Gordon and Helmholtz. Regime PDE family Range 1 Range 2 Range 3 Forcing std. 

diffusion Advection–diffusion vx ∈ [−1.0, 1.0] vy ∈ [−1.0, 1.0] κ ∈ [0 .02 , 0.35] 0.30 

advection Advection–diffusion vx ∈ [−3.0, 3.0] vy ∈ [−3.0, 3.0] κ ∈ [0 .001 , 0.08] 0.30 

balanced Advection–diffusion vx ∈ [−2.0, 2.0] vy ∈ [−2.0, 2.0] κ ∈ [0 .01 , 0.20] 0.40 

forcing Advection–diffusion vx ∈ [−1.5, 1.5] vy ∈ [−1.5, 1.5] κ ∈ [0 .01 , 0.20] 1.00 

klein gordon Klein–Gordon cx ∈ [0 .4, 2.8] cy ∈ [0 .4, 2.8] m ∈ [0 .3, 3.5] 0.45 

helmholtz Helmholtz κx ∈ [0 .03 , 0.55] κy ∈ [0 .03 , 0.55] k ∈ [0 .4, 3.5] 0.55 

E.3. Forcing Term 

The steady source term is represented spectrally on the periodic domain Ω = [0 , 1) 2. Rather than learning or optimizing a forcing value at every grid point, we parameterize f by a truncated set of low-frequency Fourier coefficients. Letting Mf

denote the number of retained forcing modes, the forcing field is written as 

fq(x, y ) = X

> |kx|<M f

X 

> |ky|<M f

bfq(kx, k y )e2πi (kxx+ky y), bfq(−kx, −ky ) = bfq(kx, k y ),

so that fq is real-valued. Equivalently, this is a finite two-dimensional sine-cosine expansion, 

fq(x, y ) = X

> |kx|<M f

X 

> |ky|<M f

akx,k y cos(2 π(kxx + ky y)) + bkx,k y sin(2 π(kxx + ky y)) ,

with coefficients collected in the forcing latent vector q. In the implementation we store the coefficients in the real-FFT half-plane and recover the physical forcing field by an inverse FFT: 

fq = F−1 bfq



.

All Fourier coefficients outside the retained low-frequency block are set to zero, so the source is smooth and resolution-transferable. We choose Mf = 12 , giving 4M 2 

> f

= 576 real latent degrees of freedom for the forcing field. This source is time-independent and enters additively in each PDE family. For example, in the evolutionary equations it appears as a steady forcing term, while in Helmholtz it contributes to the static right-hand side. 

F. Experimental Setup 

F.1. Estimating Ensemble Members for Diffusion-Based Methods 

Let U ∈ Rd denote the decoded random output under the conditional posterior for a fixed test instance, with posterior mean 

μ := E[U | y, M, u lr 0 ],

and covariance matrix Σ. Given K independent posterior samples U(1) , . . . , U(K) ∼ p(U | y, M, u lr 0 ), the Monte Carlo posterior mean is 

bμK := 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

U(k).

16 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Under the discrete L2 

> h

norm 

∥v∥2

> L2
> h

:= 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

v2 

> j

,

we have the exact identity 

E

h

∥bμK − μ∥2

> L2
> h

y, M, u lr 0

i

= 1

Kd tr(Σ) . (56) Thus the Monte Carlo error of the posterior mean decays as K−1/2. A good choice of K is therefore the smallest value such that 1

Kd tr(Σ) ≤ ε2ens , i.e. K ≥ tr(Σ) 

d ε 2ens 

, (57) for a prescribed posterior-mean tolerance εens . Equivalently, if one requires the Monte Carlo standard error to be at most an 

η-fraction of the posterior standard deviation, then K ≥ η−2. In practice, tr(Σ) is unknown and is estimated from a pilot ensemble, after which (57) is enforced conservatively over evaluation strata. An empirical study of this can be found in Figure 9. We have chosen K = 12 for as our number of ensemble members as that is where the theoretical posterior mean reaches an error of ϵ = 0 .02 .1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12    

> ensemble members K
> 10 2
> 10 1
> L2
> h error of posterior mean
> = 0.02
> = 0.05
> = 0.01
> bootstrap mean
> bootstrap 90th pct.
> theory mean
> theory q90

Figure 9. Monte Carlo convergence of the LatentPDE posterior mean as a function of the number of diffusion ensemble members K.Empirical errors are computed by subsampling posterior samples and comparing the resulting ensemble mean to the full pilot-ensemble mean, while theoretical curves use the estimate tr( bΣ) /(dK ) from the posterior covariance, as described by Equation 56. 

F.2. Partitioning the Dataset 

For each regime in Table 3, we generate independent train, validation, and test sets using the same parameter ranges. Each regime provides 5000 training examples, alongside 500 validation and 500 test example. To prevent data leakage, we ensure that no samples across the different splits share the same exact initial conditions, coefficient draws, forcing functions, or masks. As such, all samples in the train, validation, and test sets are completely independent from each regime-specific distribution, except for the intentional shift in mask distribution between training and evaluation. For each regime, we evaluate both L ATENT PDE-MAP and L ATENT PDE-E NC on the regime’s validation split, averaging RMSE over all four evaluation masks. We then select the variant with lower average validation error and freeze that choice before touching the held-out test set. The selected variant is used for the entirety of the corresponding test split for that regime. 

F.3. Evaluation Metrics 

Let u ∈ RH×W denote the ground-truth field on a discrete grid, let ˆu ∈ RH×W denote a point prediction, and let 

{u(s)}Ss=1 , u(s) ∈ RH×W ,

denote an ensemble of posterior samples when available. We write d := HW for the number of spatial degrees of freedom and identify each field with its vectorization in Rd when convenient. 17 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). For a point prediction ˆu and truth u, the per-instance RMSE is 

RMSE(ˆ u, u ) := 

 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

(ˆ uj − uj )2



> 1/2

. (58) Equivalently, RMSE is the discrete L2 error normalized by the number of grid points. Over a test set {(ˆ u(i), u (i))}Ni=1 , we report the empirical mean 

RMSE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

RMSE(ˆ u(i), u (i)). (59) 

Radially Averaged PSD Log Error. To assess scale-by-scale spectral fidelity, we compare radially averaged power spectral densities (PSDs). For a field u, let 

u◦ := u − ¯u, ¯u := 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

uj ,

and let cu◦(ξ) denote the discrete Fourier transform at frequency ξ. The two-dimensional periodogram is 

P 2D  

> u

(ξ) := |cu◦(ξ)|2

HW . (60) For integer radii k = 1 , . . . , K max with Kmax = ⌊min( H, W )/2⌋, define the annulus 

Ak := ξ : k − 12 ≤ ∥ ξ∥2 < k + 12 , (61) and the radially averaged PSD 

Pu(k) := 1

|Ak|

X

> ξ∈Ak

P 2D  

> u

(ξ). (62) The PSD log error between a prediction ˆu and truth u is then 

PSDLogErr(ˆ u, u ) := 1

Kmax 

> Kmax

X

> k=1

log 10 

 max( Pˆu(k), ε ) − log 10 

 max( Pu(k), ε ) 2

!1/2

, (63) where ε > 0 is a small floor used for numerical stability. This metric is insensitive to phase alignment and instead measures whether the prediction places the correct amount of energy at each spatial scale. We use it to complement RMSE by distinguishing physical-space accuracy from spectral consistency. 

Continuous Ranked Probability Score (CRPS). For probabilistic predictions, we evaluate the ensemble forecast using the empirical CRPS applied pointwise and then averaged over the grid. For each spatial coordinate j ∈ { 1, . . . , d }, let 

{u(1)  

> j

, . . . , u (S) 

> j

} be the ensemble of scalar predictions for the true value uj . The empirical CRPS at coordinate j is 

CRPS j = 1

S

> S

X

> s=1

|u(s) 

> j

− uj | − 12S(S − 1) 

> S

X

> s,t =1
> s̸=t

|u(s) 

> j

− u(t) 

> j

|. (64) The field-level CRPS is the spatial average 

CRPS  {u(s)}Ss=1 , u  = 1

d

> d

X

> j=1

CRPS j . (65) 18 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

F.4. Comparison Methods 3D-Var. In this section we briefly describe 3D-Var for those unfamiliar with data assimilation techniques. We note first that we operate directly on the high-resolution output field and require a high-resolution initial condition uhr 0 (approximated by bilinear upsampling of ulr 0 at test time), unlike LatentPDE which conditions only on ulr 0 .

J(x) = 12 (x − xb)⊤B−1(x − xb) + 12 (y − H (x)) ⊤R−1(y − H (x)) , (66) where xb is a background state, B is the background error covariance, R = σ2obs I is the observation error covariance, and 

H(x) = M ⊙ D s(x) is the linear observation operator composed of spatial downsampling Ds and masking by M . We initialize the background xb using either MAP or encoder prediction, consistent with LatentPDE. Since B is n × n and infeasible to form explicitly on the HR grid, we parameterize B−1 implicitly through the diffusion-operator construction of Weaver & Courtier (2001): 

B−1 ≈ σ−2

> b

 I − L2∇2p, (67) where σb is the background standard deviation, L is a spatial correlation length, and ∇2 is the discrete five-point Laplacian with Neumann boundary conditions. The power p controls the smoothness of the implied correlation function. We use 

p = 2 , which approximates a Mat´ ern-3/2 kernel. 

Ensemble Kalman Filtering (EnKF). In contrast to 3D-Var’s fixed parametric B, the Ensemble Kalman Filter (Evensen, 1994) estimates a flow-dependent background covariance from an ensemble of perturbed states. We initialize the background 

xb ∈ RH×W using MAP or encoder prediction, matching the 3D-Var setup. An ensemble of Ne = 16 (refer to Figure 10 for a plot of how this was derived) members is constructed by adding spatially-smoothed, observation-masked Gaussian noise: 

x(i) 

> b

= xb + σe S

h

(1 − 12 Mhr ) ⊙ ξ(i)i

, ξ(i) ∼ N (0 , I ), (68) where S[·] denotes repeated average pooling for spatial smoothing and Mhr is the HR-upsampled mask. The analysis update is then applied for C = 2 cycles. In each cycle, the ensemble members are passed through the observation operator 

H(x) = M ⊙ D s(x) to form the predicted observation anomalies Ay ∈ RNe×p and state anomalies Ax ∈ RNe×n. The ensemble Kalman gain is applied with perturbed observations (Burgers et al., 1998): 

x(i) ← x(i) + 1

Ne − 1 A⊤ 

> x

Ay

A⊤ 

> y

Ay

Ne − 1 + σ2obs I

!−1 y(i) − H (x(i)), (69) where y(i) = y + σobs η(i), η(i) ∼ N (0 , I ), are perturbed observations. The analysis field is the ensemble mean, post-smoothed and corrected at observed locations by the direct residual M ⊙ (y − D s(¯ x)) .10 20 30 40 50 60     

> EnKF ensemble members K
> 10 2
> L2
> h error of EnKF mean
> = 0.05
> = 0.02
> = 0.01
> bootstrap mean
> bootstrap 90th pct.
> theory /K

Figure 10. Monte Carlo convergence of the EnKF analysis mean as a function of the number of ensemble members K. We choose 

K = 16 for where the error ϵ drops below 0.01. For a more detailed explanation of how this number was derived, refer to Section F.1. 

19 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Family-specific residuals for PINNs. For completeness, the PDE residuals appearing in Lpde are given as follows: 

rη, AD = ∂tuη + vx∂xuη + vy ∂y uη − κ(∂xx uη + ∂yy uη ) − fζ ,rη, KG = ∂tt uη − c2

x∂xx uη − c2

y ∂yy uη + m2uη − fζ ,rη, H = −κx∂xx uη − κy ∂yy uη + k2uη − (uhr 0 + fζ ).

G. Impact of Sampling Perturbations on Reconstruction Accuracy 

In order to investigate the reconstruction quality of LatentPDE under varying levels of injected noise, Figures 11 through 13 below provide a qualitative comparison at observational noise levels of 0.15 , 0.30 , and 0.45 . While EnKF suffers from localized artifacts around known observation points, 3D-Var and PINNs exhibit severe over-smoothing at higher noise levels ( σ = 0 .45 ). LatentPDE however maintains accurate global field reconstructions. These trends in noise robustness are consistently observed across our Klein–Gordon and Helmholtz evaluations as well. s = 5.0%, = 0.15               

> Sparse Observations u0Ground Truth
> RMSE = 0.0284
> LatentPDE
> RMSE = 0.0961
> EnKF
> RMSE = 0.0961
> 3DVar
> RMSE = 0.1521
> PINN
> s= 5.0%, = 0.30 RMSE = 0.0653 RMSE = 0.2568 RMSE = 0.2668 RMSE = 0.4063
> s= 5.0%, = 0.45 RMSE = 0.0815 RMSE = 0.1202 RMSE = 0.0991 RMSE = 0.2582
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> = 0.15 = 0.30 = 0.45

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 11. Reconstructions of the advection–diffusion equation under increasing observation noise ( σ) at a fixed 5.0% sparsity. s = 5.0%, = 0.15               

> Sparse Observations u0Ground Truth
> RMSE = 0.2231
> LatentPDE
> RMSE = 0.2994
> EnKF
> RMSE = 0.3155
> 3DVar
> RMSE = 0.5509
> PINN
> s= 5.0%, = 0.30 RMSE = 0.1839 RMSE = 0.6082 RMSE = 0.6260 RMSE = 0.9689
> s= 5.0%, = 0.45 RMSE = 0.7691 RMSE = 0.9091 RMSE = 0.9488 RMSE = 1.0006
> 1.5
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> = 0.15 = 0.30 = 0.45

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 12. Reconstructions of the Klein–Gordon equation under increasing observation noise ( σ) at a fixed 5.0% sparsity 

20 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity s = 5.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.0114 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.0281 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.0117 

3DVar 

RMSE = 0.0273 

PINN 

s = 5.0%, = 0.30 RMSE = 0.0134 RMSE = 0.0628 RMSE = 0.0331 RMSE = 0.0321 

s = 5.0%, = 0.45 RMSE = 0.0653 RMSE = 0.1937 RMSE = 0.1798 RMSE = 0.1488 

1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> = 0.15 = 0.30 = 0.45

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 13. Reconstructions of the Helmholtz equation under increasing observation noise ( σ) at a fixed 5.0% sparsity 

21 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

H. Robustness to Mask Variations 

Additionally, we explore the robustness of the framework under diverse spatial patterns of known data. Qualitatively, the results show that LatentPDE is learning to preserve the structural fidelity of samples during spatial reconstruction. This is perhaps most evident in Figure 15, where the governing dynamics produce sharp and abrupt patterns. LatentPDE is still able to capture these global structures under severe observational sparsity and convert them to a higher resolution. In both the advection–diffusion (Figure 14) and Helmholtz (Figure 16) equations, LatentPDE shows an impressive ability to extrapolate smooth gradients when given highly constrained spatial masks, whereas other methods overfit or are otherwise unable to exploit the known observations. This trend suggests that LatentPDE is effectively learning a strong global prior of the underlying physics within its latent space. s = 5.0%, = 0.15                     

> Sparse Observations u0Ground Truth
> RMSE = 0.0798
> LatentPDE
> RMSE = 0.0935
> EnKF
> RMSE = 0.0878
> 3DVar
> RMSE = 0.2187
> PINN
> s= 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0430 RMSE = 0.0738 RMSE = 0.0704 RMSE = 0.0463
> s= 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0367 RMSE = 0.1193 RMSE = 0.1194 RMSE = 0.2374
> s= 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0587 RMSE = 0.0776 RMSE = 0.1421 RMSE = 0.3604
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> Grid Boundary Radial Single Patch

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 14. Reconstructions of the advection–diffusion equation under diverse mask configurations (grid, boundary, radial, and single patch). For all realizations here, σ is fixed at 0.15 and sparsity at 5.0%. 

22 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity s = 5.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.3659 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.4264 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.4377 

3DVar 

RMSE = 0.3979 

PINN 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.4384 RMSE = 0.7257 RMSE = 0.7482 RMSE = 0.6634 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.1967 RMSE = 0.3015 RMSE = 0.3074 RMSE = 0.3741 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.2884 RMSE = 0.4957 RMSE = 0.3984 RMSE = 0.6931 1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Grid Boundary Radial Single Patch

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 15. Reconstructions of the Klein–Gordon equation under diverse mask configurations (grid, boundary, radial, and single patch). For all realizations here, σ is fixed at 0.15 and sparsity at 5.0%. s = 5.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.0075 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.0264 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.0109 

3DVar 

RMSE = 0.0546 

PINN 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0045 RMSE = 0.0289 RMSE = 0.0104 RMSE = 0.0178 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0118 RMSE = 0.0324 RMSE = 0.0133 RMSE = 0.0519 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0119 RMSE = 0.0363 RMSE = 0.0258 RMSE = 0.0495 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> Grid Boundary Radial Single Patch

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 16. Reconstructions of the Helmholtz equation under diverse mask configurations (grid, boundary, radial, and single patch). For all realizations here, σ is fixed at 0.15 and sparsity at 5.0%. 

23 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

I. Robustness to Varying Levels of Sparsity 

We similarly evaluate the effect of increasing sparsity levels on the reconstruction quality. Across the board in all PDEs, looking at the single patch mask (the most challenging for reconstruction), LatentPDE achieves the lowest RMSE from 1% to 5% sparsity. s = 1.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.1588 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.2263 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.2361 

3DVar 

RMSE = 0.6261 

PINN    

> s= 2.0%, = 0.15

RMSE = 0.2412 RMSE = 0.3110 RMSE = 0.3813 RMSE = 0.9960    

> s= 3.0%, = 0.15

RMSE = 0.0462 RMSE = 0.0993 RMSE = 0.1004 RMSE = 0.3123    

> s= 4.0%, = 0.15

RMSE = 0.1017 RMSE = 0.1996 RMSE = 0.1997 RMSE = 0.3915    

> s= 5.0%, = 0.15

RMSE = 0.0354 RMSE = 0.1418 RMSE = 0.1419 RMSE = 0.1470 

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> s = 1% s = 2% s = 3% s = 4% s = 5%

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 17. Qualitative comparison of reconstructions for advection–diffusion at 5 levels of sparsity (from 1% to 5%) for the single-patch mask. Noise ( σ) is fixed at 0.15. 

24 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity s = 1.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.1006 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.1693 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.1786 

3DVar 

RMSE = 1.3001 

PINN 

s = 2.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.4990 RMSE = 0.5007 RMSE = 0.5163 RMSE = 1.4704 

s = 3.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.2415 RMSE = 0.4230 RMSE = 0.2952 RMSE = 0.4146 

s = 4.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.3863 RMSE = 0.4577 RMSE = 0.4833 RMSE = 0.4839 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.6922 RMSE = 0.7660 RMSE = 0.7794 RMSE = 0.7460 

1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

> s = 1% s = 2% s = 3% s = 4% s = 5%

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 18. Qualitative comparison of reconstructions for Klein–Gordon at 5 levels of sparsity (from 1% to 5%) for the single-patch mask. Noise ( σ) is fixed at 0.15. s = 1.0%, = 0.15 

Sparse Observations u0 Ground Truth 

RMSE = 0.0245 

LatentPDE 

RMSE = 0.0324 

EnKF 

RMSE = 0.0317 

3DVar 

RMSE = 0.1018 

PINN 

s = 2.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0133 RMSE = 0.0504 RMSE = 0.0477 RMSE = 0.0691 

s = 3.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0103 RMSE = 0.0195 RMSE = 0.0134 RMSE = 0.0381 

s = 4.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0169 RMSE = 0.0325 RMSE = 0.0207 RMSE = 0.0354 

s = 5.0%, = 0.15 RMSE = 0.0288 RMSE = 0.0533 RMSE = 0.0319 RMSE = 0.0688 

1.5 

1.0 

0.5 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

> s = 1% s = 2% s = 3% s = 4% s = 5%

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( )

Figure 19. Qualitative comparison of reconstructions for Helmholtz at 5 levels of sparsity (from 1% to 5%) for the single-patch mask. Noise ( σ) is fixed at 0.15. 

25 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

J. Random Samples from Posterior Distribution 

For thoroughness, we visualize a few reconstruction samples from each of the PDE families to show the generative nature of our model. In practicality, when we present our results in the main section, we produce a total of 12 generations for each run and average them. The justification for this is further elaborated in Section 5.4.       

> Figure 20. Random realizations generated by LatentPDE for the different equation scenarios at σ= 0 .15 and s= 5 .0% . This visualization is meant to show a subset of the ensemble average that we use to report our results.

K. Ablation Study 

Our ablation study evaluates three inference-time modifications to the standard diffusion model setup. We follow standard practice and compare variants using RMSE under the same downstream inference protocol. All ablation studies are run on 5000 training samples per subregime of advection–diffusion data with s = 5% and σ = 0 .15 .In our default configuration, we use K = 12 posterior samples, an 80 -step MAP initialization for L ATENT PDE-MAP, reconstruction guidance enabled with scale 80 , three guidance steps per eligible reverse-diffusion step, and final latent refinement enabled for 20 Adam steps. 

MAP budget. The MAP-budget ablation asks whether L ATENT PDE-MAP needs a well-converged test-time MAP initialization. Reducing the initialization from 80 to 20 Adam steps did not hurt performance in this run; it improved RMSE by 9.9% . The intermediate 40 -step setting worsened RMSE by 8.9% , suggesting that the dependence on MAP budget is not monotone in this run. We suspect that this is due to the stochasticity of the posterior sampling; having a good initialization does not have a large impact on the final reconstruction. MAP init. steps RMSE Change 80 0.1223 –40 0.1332 +8 .9% 

20 0.1103 −9.9%  

> Table 4. MAP-initialization budget ablation for L ATENT PDE-MAP.

26 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

Reconstruction guidance. Removing reconstruction guidance has a modest effect compared with the other inference knobs. L ATENT PDE-E NC worsens by 3.9% , while L ATENT PDE-MAP changes only slightly and improves by 1.1% in mean RMSE. This suggests that, for these advection–diffusion runs, guidance is helpful for the encoder branch but is not the dominant source of accuracy. Branch γg RMSE Change 

80 0.1223 –LATENT PDE-MAP 40 0.1216 −0.6% 0 0.1210 −1.1% 80 0.1033 –LATENT PDE-E NC 40 0.1045 +1 .2% 0 0.1073 +3 .9% 

Table 5. Reconstruction-guidance ablation. We vary the guidance scale γg while keeping the guidance step size fixed. 

Final refinement. The effect of final refinement is branch-dependent. Removing refinement substantially hurts LATENT PDE-E NC , increasing RMSE by 30 .4% , which indicates that the encoder-initialized sampler relies on the fi-nal local observation-correction step. In contrast, L ATENT PDE-MAP improves by 16 .1% without refinement, suggesting that the default refinement can over-correct MAP-initialized samples under sparse noisy observations in this setting. Branch λref RMSE Change LATENT PDE-MAP 0.01 0.1223 –

0 0.1027 −16 .1% 

LATENT PDE-E NC 0.01 0.1033 –

0 0.1347 +30 .4% 

Table 6. Final-refinement ablation. Setting λref = 0 denotes disabling the post-diffusion refinement step. 

No source term. In our final ablation experiment, we investigate whether solving for the homogeneous case for our three PDE families has an impact on the results found in Table 1. Results for this study remain consistent with those found in the inhomogeneous case. Please refer to Table 7 for full results. 

Table 7. Comparison of different models across PDE families with no source term (homogeneous case). As with Table 1, we report the better result between the MAP and encoder initial priors for 3D-Var and EnKF, chosen by the lowest aggregate RMSE in each setting. MAE is reported for deterministic point estimates, and CRPS for probabilistic predictions. A lower value is more desirable for all metrics listed.                                                                           

> Advection–Diffusion Klein–Gordon Helmholtz Method RMSE PSD MAE CRPS RMSE PSD MAE CRPS RMSE PSD MAE CRPS LatentPDE-MAP (Ours) 0.080 1.049 –0.058 0.626 3.932 –0.415 0.023 2.918 –0.020 LatentPDE-Enc (Ours) 0.082 1.092 –0.062 0.653 3.982 –0.453 0.022 2.893 –0.018
> EnKF 0.082 12.500 –0.064 0.631 3.709 –0.491 0.039 7.467 –0.025 3D-Var 0.131 9.012 0.069 –0.628 3.413 0.496 –0.031 4.310 0.029 –PINN 0.169 8.224 0.136 –0.743 6.221 0.585 –0.080 5.500 0.067 –

27 Learning Interpretable PDE Representations for Generative Reconstructions with Structured Sparsity 

L. Computational Efficiency Analysis 

For a single test sample on the advection–diffusion equation with source term setting, we show the inference times and associated number of parameters for all models used in Table 8 run on a single A5000 GPU. Because 3D-Var and EnKF are traditional data assimilation frameworks rather than learned models, they lack tunable weights in the deep learning sense. As seen, LatentPDE achieves up to a 64% speedup when compared against FunDPS, likely due to the choice in latent parametrization and number of parameters. These runtimes are generated from a single reconstruction for a 128 × 128 

resolution field with s = 5% and σ = 0 .15 . 

> Table 8. Comparison of model size and inference compute time.

Model Parameters Inference Time (s) 

LatentPDE-MAP (Ours) 7.06M 78.65 LatentPDE-Enc (Ours) 9.62M 33.12 FunDPS 184.6M 91.21 EnKF (MAP) − 3.15 EnKF (Enc) − 0.23 3D-Var (MAP) − 3.84 3D-Var (Enc) − 0.92 PINN 58757 1.68 28