Title: AutoSaddler: Automatic Harness Optimization with Durable Updates from Agent Execution Traces

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.23041v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 01:52:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
# AutoSaddler : Automatic Harness Optimization with Durable Updates from Agent Execution Traces 

Sungho Park 1∗ Wonjoong Kim 2∗ Rongyuan Tan 3∗ Jue Zhang 4† Wook-Shin Han 1†

Pengfei Gao 4 Chanyoung Park 2 Yongqiang Yao 4 Rao Fu 4 Elsie Nallipogu 4

Qingwei Lin 4 Saravan Rajmohan 4 Dongmei Zhang 41POSTECH 2KAIST 3Southern University of Science and Technology 4Microsoft 

juezhang@microsoft.com wshan@dblab.postech.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

LLM agents remain unreliable on long-horizon tasks, where small local failures can compound over extended interactions and lead to overall task failure. Although external harnesses can substantially improve robustness, harness design remains a manual and expensive process that requires searching over a large space of prompts, tool configurations, and control logic. We propose AutoSaddler , an automatic harness optimization framework that formulates harness improvement as an offline learning problem and iteratively updates the harness using failure signals from mini-batches. AutoSaddler combines failure-trace diagnosis, structured patch generation that treats the harness as code, and validation-based update selection. Experiments on GAIA2, SWE-Bench Pro, and Terminal-Bench 2.0 show that AutoSaddler substantially improves agent performance over the corresponding base harnesses, achieving gains of 9.0, 9.6, and 10.0 percentage points, respectively. Ablation studies further suggest that effective harness optimization benefits from three ingredients: deep debugging rather than shallow reflection, targeted modifications rather than unconstrained editing, and generalization-aware selection rather than trajectory-specific repair. Together, these results suggest that automatic harness optimization is a promising path toward more performant and reliable agent systems. Project website and code will be available at https://aka.ms/AutoSaddler-website. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have improved rapidly in capability in the past years. Despite this progress, they continue to exhibit “jagged intelligence”: strong performance on some tasks coexists with poor performance on others that appear closely related or even simpler. This unevenness creates a fundamental reliability challenge for agentic applications, especially in autonomous, multi-step, and long-horizon settings, where success depends on sustained competence across many consecutive decisions. In response, an emerging line of work seeks to build external harness layers around LLMs to make agent behavior more robust on long-horizon tasks [61, 3, 5, 31, 21]. Empirical evidence suggests that a well-designed harness can substantially improve agent performance [21]. Manual harness tuning, however, is time-consuming and difficult to scale. It requires exploring a large design space, including prompt specifications, tool configurations, and other system-level choices. Moreover, evaluating each candidate harness is costly, since the agent may need to execute many steps before task success or failure becomes clear. Analyzing the resulting long-horizon trajectories is itself nontrivial and often requires substantial manual effort. These challenges create a strong need      

> ∗Work done during an internship at Microsoft.
> †Corresponding authors. Preprint. arXiv:2608.23041v1 [cs.AI] 24 Aug 2026 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> Total Tasks Executed
> 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
> Best Dev Set Accuracy (%)
> AutoSaddler Meta-Harness GEPA

(a) Compute Efficiency 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500  

> Total Traces Leveraged for Optimization
> 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
> Best Dev Set Accuracy (%)
> AutoSaddler Meta-Harness GEPA

(b) Learning Efficiency 

Figure 1: Comparison of optimization performance and efficiency on GAIA2. (a) AutoSaddler reaches 72.3% dev accuracy with ∼1,000 total task executions, whereas GEPA and Meta-Harness saturate at 64.6% and 61.5% , respectively, despite consuming ∼2,800 task executions. (b) When measured by the number of execution rollouts leveraged for optimization, AutoSaddler achieves its best performance after consuming only 147 traces, ∼10 × fewer than Meta-Harness (1,400 traces). for automated harness optimization methods that can efficiently adapt the harness when switching to a new underlying LLM or deploying the agent in a new domain. In this work, we formulate automatic harness optimization as an offline learning problem and introduce 

AutoSaddler , a framework that iteratively refines the harness using failure signals from batches of training tasks. At each iteration, we first construct a candidate harness from the accumulated exploration history and evaluate it on the training examples in the current mini-batch. We then diagnose failed agent trajectories and use the resulting insights to guide patch generation, treating the harness itself as code. For each accepted harness update, we further assess generalization on a validation set. Together, these components enable AutoSaddler to optimize harnesses in a principled and scalable manner, while promoting updates that generalize beyond the observed training samples. We evaluate AutoSaddler on three agent benchmarks: GAIA2 [10], SWE-Bench Pro [9], and Terminal-Bench 2.0 [28]. Across all three benchmarks, AutoSaddler substantially improves long-horizon agent performance. It surpasses the corresponding base harness by 9.0 percentage points on GAIA2, 

9.6 points on SWE-Bench Pro, and 10.0 points on Terminal-Bench 2.0, and exceeds the strongest automated baseline by 7.4 , 4.4 , and 6.7 points, respectively. Ablations and qualitative analysis further support the design rationale of AutoSaddler, showing that effective harness optimization depends on three key ingredients. First, in-depth diagnosis is necessary because long-horizon failures require deep debugging rather than shallow reflection on agent execution failures. Second, structured intervention is important because the large and diverse harness space favors targeted modifications over unconstrained editing. Third, generalization-aware selection is critical because improving performance over a task distribution requires retaining broadly useful updates rather than repairing a single trajectory. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: • We formulate automatic harness optimization as an offline learning problem over prompts, tools, and middleware, leveraging failure signals from agent execution traces. • We introduce AutoSaddler, which combines evidence-grounded diagnosis, structured patching, and generalization-aware selection to produce durable harness updates. • We conduct extensive experiments on three challenging agent benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed approach in improving long-horizon agent performance. 

## 2 Related Work 

Auto Prompt Optimization. Automatic optimization of LLM-based systems has been extensively studied in the context of prompt optimization, including gradient-free search [62], textual-gradient and mini-batch methods [36], history-aware and evolutionary optimization [47, 14, 1], planning-2based search [43], programming abstractions [18], autodiff-style optimization [50], and Bayesian multi-prompt tuning [32]. While AutoSaddler draws on this line of work, harness optimization is broader than prompt optimization: long-horizon traces often require deeper diagnosis than simple reflection, and the search space spans prompts, tools, and runtime control logic. 

Self-Evolving Agents and Experience-Based Improvement. Learning from failure traces is related to experience-based agent improvement [60] and self-evolving agents [2], where experience is used to build libraries [6], create tools [37, 45], and construct memory, skills, or knowledge bases [33, 19, 29]. Unlike these typically online continual-learning approaches, we focus on offline harness optimization for generalization across environments. Some prior work further emphasizes self-referentiality, i.e., whether the meta-agent coincides with the task agent, as in Darwin-Gödel Machines [54, 55], Gödel agents [49], and Huxley-Gödel Ma-chines [42]. In contrast, we do not impose such constraints, as our objective is to improve the task agent’s external harness under a finite rollout budget rather than to model self-referential dynamics. 

Agent Systems and Harness Optimization. Automatic optimization of the external layers of LLM-based systems builds on a broad line of prior work, including LLM inference hyperparameter tuning [41, 11], workflow optimization [56, 64, 44], and system optimization by treating the system itself as code [59, 16]. More recently, this line of work has expanded to optimizing the full agent harness [22, 25, 34, 40]. One prominent work is Meta-Harness [22], which likewise employs a coding agent to build an end-to-end optimization pipeline. In contrast, we place greater emphasis on structured patching and on a systematic training pipeline that explicitly accounts for generalization. Recent contemporaneous studies 3 have further expanded automatic harness optimization through observability-driven evolution [23], diagnosis- and weakness-guided repair [7, 52], Bayesian con-figuration search [38], historical-experience recalibration [13], self-supervised retrospective opti-mization [35], generalization-oriented constrained evolution [57], experience-driven test-time adapta-tion [17], and joint optimization of harnesses and model weights [15, 8]. Collectively, these works explore complementary aspects of harness optimization, while AutoSaddler emphasizes the joint roles of in-depth diagnosis, structured intervention, and generalization-aware selection. 

Agent Trace Failure Diagnosis and Repair. Long-horizon agent traces with complex tool interac-tions have motivated work on failure diagnosis [58, 51, 26, 12, 53]. These methods primarily target single-trace diagnosis and often assume traces fit within the LLM context window, limiting their applicability to very long traces and mini-batch diagnosis. We instead build on the Claude Agent SDK (CA-SDK) [4], leveraging its file access and context management capabilities. Recent work also studies trace-level interventions for repairing failed runs [27, 63]. Unlike such task-specific “hot fixes”, our goal is to produce persistent harness repairs that improve future behavior. 

LLM-Driven Evolutionary Search. Our candidate selection method uses LLMs to select and recombine patches from prior candidates based on exploration history, aligning with recent LLM-augmented evolutionary algorithms [1, 30, 39, 46, 24]. We instantiate this idea with CA-SDK-based candidate selection, leaving specialized LLM-driven evolutionary algorithms for future work. 

## 3 Preliminaries 

Agentic Task and Execution Trace. We consider agentic tasks that require multi-step reasoning, repeated tool use, and environment interaction. Let x ∈ X be a task description sampled from a task distribution T , and assume that task instances in X are stateless and independent. Conditioned on a harness parameter θ, executing the task agent on a task x induces a stochastic execution process. We write (τ, ˆy) ∼ Pθ (· | x), where τ is the execution trace and ˆy is the final output. Equivalently, the harness Hθ defines the conditional execution distribution Pθ (τ, ˆy | x).This stochasticity captures randomness from LLM sampling, tool-use decisions, and environment interactions. 

> 3These works appeared during the final stage of this work preparation or the subsequent peer-review period.

3Optimization Space: Agent Harness. Although the term harness is often used colloquially to refer to everything outside the LLM that contributes to effective agent behavior, its precise scope is still evolving in the community [61]. In this work, following harness engineering practices in LangChain [21], we focus on three classes of harness parameters and do not consider other components, such as memory or skill curation, since our setting assumes tasks are largely stateless and independent. Formally, we define the optimization space as: 

θ = ( θprompt , θ tool , θ middleware ) ∈ Θ, (1) where θprompt specifies the instructions and system prompts, θtool defines the available tools and their interfaces, and θmiddleware captures runtime control logic, including hooks and agent-loop behavior. 

Objective: Budget-Constrained Optimization. Our population objective is to maximize expected task performance over the target task distribution. Let μ(ˆ y, y ∗) be a task-level metric, such as accuracy or pass/fail success, that evaluates the final output ˆy against the gold answer y∗. Since executing a harnessed LLM agent may be stochastic, we define 

J(θ) = E(x,y ∗)∼T E(τ, ˆy)∼Pθ (·| x)[μ(ˆ y, y ∗)] , θ∗ = arg max  

> θ∈Θ

J(θ),

where θ∗ denotes the optimized harness. In practice, J(θ) is not directly observable and each execution consumes a rollout. Given a rollout budget K, AutoSaddler searches over a set of candidate harnesses VK ⊂ Θ explored within that budget. For a finite dataset D, we use the empirical estimate 

bJD (θ) = 1

|D|

X 

> (xi,y ∗
> i)∈D

1

RiRiX

> r=1

μ(ˆ yi,r , y ∗ 

> i

), (τi,r , ˆyi,r ) ∼ Pθ (· | xi),

where Ri is the number of repeated executions for task i. AutoSaddler returns the candidate with the highest development-set empirical score among candidates evaluated within the rollout budget: 

ˆθAS = arg max 

> θ∈V K, dev

bJDdev (θ).

The final reported test performance is then bJDtest (ˆθAS ).

## 4 Proposed Method: AutoSaddler 

We now present AutoSaddler, an iterative framework for automatic harness optimization of LLM agents. We begin with an overview of the workflow and then describe each key component in detail. 

Overview. We formulate harness optimization as an offline learning problem. This formulation reflects the practical setting in which agent harnesses are typically tuned during development before being deployed to production. Since training may involve many tasks and rollout-based evaluation is expensive, we adopt a mini-batch training paradigm, following standard machine learning practice and prior work on automatic prompt optimization [36, 1]. Specifically, we partition the task set X into training, development, and test splits, denoted by Dtrain ,

Ddev , and Dtest , respectively. As illustrated in Figure 2, each iteration n begins by evaluating the current harness Hn, parameterized by θn, on a mini-batch Bn ⊂ Dtrain ( 1 ). The workflow then enters the Diagnosis–Patch Session , which analyzes failed execution traces in the mini-batch and derives a structured patch ∆θn, producing an updated harness H′ 

> n

= Hn + ∆ θn ( 2 ). The patched harness is verified on the same mini-batch ( 3 ); we regard the patch as a mini-batch improvement if 

bJBn (H′

> n

) > bJBn (Hn). When this criterion is satisfied, we further evaluate H′ 

> n

on Ddev to estimate whether the update generalizes beyond the observed mini-batch ( 4 ). Regardless of whether the patch is accepted, the Reflection Session compares pre- and post-patch traces; records fixed, regressed, still-failing, and still-passing cases ( 5 ); and stores the resulting lessons and scores in EvoDAG , a directed acyclic graph that tracks the evolution history of harness updates ( 6 ). The Evolution Session then uses EvoDAG to propose the next candidate harness Hn+1 

( 7 ). After the rollout budget K is exhausted, AutoSaddler returns the candidate with the highest 4𝑯 𝒏  𝑯′ 𝒏    

> Harness Improved!
> If improved
> If not
> TRACES
> Before/After Patch
> …
> 𝑯 𝟏
> Test Verify Diagnosis –Patch

Diagnosis – Patch Session  

> Task Agent
> (LLM + Harness)
> Training
> Set
> Diagnosis
> –Patch Agent
> Reflection
> Agent
> Dev
> Set
> Lessons from
> Reflection

Reflection Session 

Evolution Session   

> Evolution
> Agent
> 𝑯 𝟐 𝑯 𝒏−𝟏 𝑯 𝒏
> 𝑯 𝒏+𝟏
> Mini Batch
> Exploration Phase
> Refinement
> Phase
> Prompt
> Tool
> Middleware
> …
> EvoDAG
> Extract
> Lessons

Figure 2: Overview of AutoSaddler . The iterative optimization loop: the current harness is tested on a mini-batch, diagnosed and patched across harness components, verified for improvement, and then reflected upon to extract lessons into the EvoDAG, which guides the evolution of the next harness. empirical development-set score among all candidates evaluated on Ddev . The selected harness is then evaluated once on the held-out test set and is not further modified using test feedback. This workflow mirrors standard mini-batch learning, but adapts it to textual harness optimization. The Diagnosis–Patch–Verification steps ( 2 and 3 ) play the role of backpropagation under textual gradients: because textual error signals are not automatically checked like numerical gradients, each update requires explicit hypothesis generation, harness intervention, and empirical verification. EvoDAG and the Evolution Session play an optimizer-like role by accumulating reflection signals to perform history-aware harness evolution. We detail this analogy and its discrepancies in Appendix A. 

Diagnosis-Patch Session. During this session, the execution traces from the mini-batch, including both successful and failed runs, are passed to the Diagnosis-Patch Agent for failure diagnosis and patch generation. We do not separate diagnosis from patch generation, allowing the agent to fully leverage the contextual information gathered during diagnosis when producing patches. Our diagnosis procedure is designed to be principled and evidence-based. In addition to each failure trace, we provide the agent with the harness codebase θn and structured guidance that enables it to progressively retrieve relevant trace details, thereby mitigating the long-context challenges posed by long agent trajectories. Based on this evidence, the agent identifies the suspected root cause, considers alternative hypotheses, and proposes recommendations for patch generation. Patch generation is likewise structured. Specifically, the agent produces a structured patch ∆θn

that targets one or more harness components. Rather than allowing unconstrained edits over the full harness codebase, we expose only the source files that implement the harness’s functional logic, while prohibiting access to code related to evaluation or benchmark data. We further organize the patch space into three categories: Prompt , Tool , and Middleware , each corresponding to a distinct layer of the agent harness. Table 1 enumerates the subtypes of each category and provides their descriptions. We further divide these patch types into two higher-level groups: Capability Patches and Steering Patches . Capability Patches modify executable code or orchestration logic, whereas Steering Patches consist of textual edits that leave the underlying code unchanged, including modifications to prompts, tool descriptions, and hook reminder texts. Since these two patch groups may affect the harness in different ways, we introduce Phased Patch Scheduling , analogous to learning-rate scheduling in standard model training. In this schedule, optimization begins with a Capability Patch phase and then transitions to a Steering Patch phase. Additional details on Phased Patch Scheduling are provided in Appendix A, while the diagnosis and patch-generation instructions are described in Appendix P. 5Table 1: Adopted patch categories, with subtypes labeled as Capability (C) or Steering (S) Patch.            

> Category Subtype Description
> Prompt Patch Prompt Rule Addition (S) Add or modify behavioral rules in the system prompt. Prompt Rule Modification (S) Revise existing prompt rules to resolve conflicts or sharpen guidance. Tool Patch New Tool Addition (C) Add a new tool when no existing tool supports the required action. Argument Modification (C) Add or fix tool parameters to enhance filtering or selection capabilities. Implementation Fix (C) Fix bugs or extend internal tool functionality to produce correct results. Tool Description Fix (S) Modify tool docstrings to avoid tool misuse. Middleware Patch PreToolUse Hook (S) Inject a just-in-time reminder before a specific tool call. Infrastructure Change (C) Modify agent configuration, iteration budget, or environment settings. Agent Loop Logic Change (C) Add preprocessing steps or budget reminders to the agent loop.

Reflection Session. After evaluating the patched harness H′ 

> n

on the same mini-batch, and optionally on the development set, we enter the Reflection Session to extract lessons from the current harness update. Specifically, the Reflection Agent is instructed to compare agent performance before and after applying the patch on the mini-batch. The resulting outcomes are grouped into four categories: 

“fixed” , “regressed” , “still-failing” , and “still-passing” . For each category, we provide targeted self-reflection questions to elicit insights into why the patch was effective, which failure patterns it addressed, why regressions occurred, why the patch was insufficient, or whether the patch had any effect at all. The agent may also inspect trace details during reflection. Furthermore, if the patch triggers an extended evaluation on the development set, we additionally prompt reflection on the development-set performance, with particular emphasis on whether and how the patch generalizes beyond the mini-batch. These lessons, together with the patch description, mini-batch results, and evaluation metric results μ(H′

> n

), are stored as node-level attributes in the EvoDAG to facilitate harness evolution. More details on the reflection instructions can be found in Appendix P. 

Evolution Session. The EvoDAG is a directed acyclic graph G = ( V, E ) that serves as the cumulative memory of the optimization process. Each node vn ∈ V corresponds to a previously explored harness and is annotated with its associated lessons and performance signals. Each directed edge e ∈ E represents the diff ∆θ between a parent harness and its descendant. During the Evolution Session, the Evolution Agent consults the full EvoDAG to synthesize a new harness Hn+1 . Rather than continuing solely from H′

> n

, the agent can compose elements from any subset of previously explored harnesses, guided by the accumulated lessons stored in the graph. This merge operation is analogous to evolutionary search, enabling the framework to escape local optima by recombining successful components across different lineages in the optimization history. The resulting harness Hn+1 is then evaluated on a fresh mini-batch in the next iteration. Further details of the evolution instructions are provided in Appendix P. 

Design Rationale. Overall, AutoSaddler is designed around three requirements for effective auto-matic harness optimization: in-depth diagnosis , structured intervention , and generalization-aware selection . The Diagnosis-Patch Session supports in-depth diagnosis by grounding updates in explicit analysis of long-horizon execution traces and the harness codebase, enabling deep debugging rather than shallow reflection. The patch taxonomy and phased schedule support structured intervention by restricting optimization to targeted changes over prompts, tools, and middleware, rather than unconstrained editing. The Reflection and Evolution Sessions support generalization-aware selection by combining mini-batch verification, optional development-set evaluation, and EvoDAG-based memory, so that retained updates are more likely to generalize beyond a single trajectory. Together, these components turn harness optimization into an iterative process of diagnosing failures, applying targeted updates, and retaining changes that are more likely to generalize. 

## 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks and Base Harness Systems. We evaluate AutoSaddler on three diverse benchmarks: GAIA2 [10], SWE-Bench Pro (SBP) [9], and Terminal-Bench 2.0 (TB2) [28]. GAIA2 evaluates 6Table 2: Test-set Pass@1 results on GAIA2, reported as mean ± standard deviation over three runs. Values in parentheses indicate the number of tasks; boldface denotes the best result. 

Harness (Type) GAIA2 Universe (Pass@1) Avg. 21 (107) 22 (112) 27 (81) 

Default Agent (Manual) 54 .8 ± 4.8 51 .5 ± 4.9 52 .7 ± 4.3 53 .0 ± 1.5

GEPA (Auto) 60 .1 ± 3.9 47 .9 ± 3.4 56 .4 ± 0.7 54 .6 ± 2.5

Meta-Harness (Auto) 53 .0 ± 1.1 51 .5 ± 5.2 56 .0 ± 0.7 53 .2 ± 2.2

AutoSaddler (Auto) 61 .4 ± 2.4 60 .7 ± 2.4 64 .6 ± 3.1 62 .0 ± 1.2

w/o In-depth Diagnosis (Auto) 56 .7 ± 4.2 57 .1 ± 3.9 60 .1 ± 5.0 57 .8 ± 3.8

w/o Structured Intervention (Auto) 58 .9 ± 2.5 53 .3 ± 7.6 59 .3 ± 3.3 56 .9 ± 3.8

w/o Generalization-Aware Selection (Auto) 53 .3 ± 1.9 44 .9 ± 6.7 54 .7 ± 4.0 50 .6 ± 4.0

Table 3: Test-set Pass@1 results on SWE-Bench Pro and Terminal-Bench 2.0, reported as mean ±

standard deviation over three runs. Parentheses indicate the number of tasks; bold denotes the best result per column.                                                                           

> SWE-Bench Pro (Pass@1) Harness (Type) Ansible (96) Flipt (85) Element-web (56) Avg.
> SWE-agent (Manual) 40 .6±1.931 .0±3.541 .1±1.737 .3±4.8
> GEPA (Auto) 50 .0±1.332 .2±1.445 .2±0.642 .5±1.2
> Meta-Harness (Auto) 36 .9±2.931 .3±1.738 .7±0.835 .3±2.0
> AutoSaddler (Auto) 58 .0±1.836 .5±1.843 .5±1.646 .9±1.8
> Terminal-Bench 2.0 (Pass@1) Harness (Type) Test-Split (40)
> Terminus 2 (Manual) 40 .0±0.0
> Terminus KIRA (Manual) 47 .5±2.5
> GEPA (Auto) 42 .5±2.5
> Meta-Harness (Auto) 43 .3±5.8
> AutoSaddler (Iter2) (Auto) 45 .0±0.0
> AutoSaddler (Iter34) (Auto) 50 .0±0.0

general-purpose assistant capabilities in a simulated smartphone environment spanning 10 distinct 

Universes , each emulating a persona’s daily digital life. We use the default ReAct-based agent provided by GAIA2 as the base harness. SBP targets enterprise-scale software engineering tasks drawn from popular repositories, for which we use SWE-agent [48] as the base harness. Finally, TB2 comprises 89 realistic tasks across domains including system administration, machine learning, and cybersecurity; for TB2, we adopt Terminus 2 as the base harness. 

Implementation and Baseline Methods. We implement the three agents in AutoSaddler (i.e., the Diagnosis-Patch Agent , Reflection Agent , and Evolution Agent ) using Claude Agent SDK (CA-SDK) [4]. Detailed agent instructions are provided in Appendix P, and EvoDAG implementation details are given in Appendix B. We compare AutoSaddler against GEPA [1] and Meta-Harness [22]. GEPA is a prompt-centric baseline that iteratively optimizes system prompts. By contrast, Meta-Harness shifts the optimization target from prompts to the agent harness, using a minimal system design and adopting CA-SDK for end-to-end system optimization. Since only TB2 was evaluated by Meta-Harness, we adapt GEPA to GAIA2 and TB2, and Meta-Harness to GAIA2; adaptation details are provided in Appendix B. 

Experimental Protocol and Data Splits. Unless otherwise noted, all optimization methods use 

Claude Opus 4.6 as the underlying LLM with default endpoint settings. To evaluate generalization, we ensure that the training, development, and test sets contain tasks from distinct task groups. For example, in SBP, the training set consists of tasks from qutebrowser ; the development set contains tasks from Vuls and NodeBB ; and the test set comprises tasks from Ansible , Flipt , and 

Element-web . This split enables us to evaluate generalization across repositories. Additional details on the data splits for all three benchmarks are provided in Appendix B. Unless otherwise noted, for each optimization method, we perform a single evolution run on the training and development sets, and conduct three repeated runs when evaluating on the test sets. 4 We report Pass@1 success rates as the evaluation metric. 75.2 Main Results 

We report Pass@1 success rates on the test sets for GAIA2 in Table 2, and for SBP and TB2 in Table 3. Two main observations are made. First, AutoSaddler discovers more effective harnesses than the corresponding base harnesses across all three benchmarks. Specifically, AutoSaddler improves over the default agent on GAIA2 by +9.0 pp (53 .0% → 62 .0% ), over SWE-agent on SBP by +8.4 pp (37 .3% → 46 .9% ), and over Terminus 2 on TB2 by +10.0 pp (40 .0% → 50 .0% ). Second, 

AutoSaddler outperforms the automated baselines GEPA and Meta-Harness. Compared with the strongest automated baseline on each benchmark, AutoSaddler achieves gains of +7.4 pp on GAIA2 (54 .6% vs. 62 .0% ), +6.2 pp on SBP ( 42 .5% vs. 46 .9% ), and +4.4 pp on TB2 ( 43 .3% vs. 50 .0% ). On TB2, AutoSaddler also surpasses the manually expert-tuned harness, Terminus KIRA [20], by +2.5 pp 

(47 .5% vs. 50 .0% ). We further verify robustness to optimization stochasticity and training-distribution shift. An indepen-dent AutoSaddler run on GAIA2 achieves 58 .6% Pass@1, remaining well above the base harness and rerun baselines (Appendix C), while optimization on a different training universe achieves 57 .4% , a 

+5.9 pp gain over the base harness (Appendix D). Beyond cross-task-group evaluation, we further analyze cross-model transferability . Specifically, we replace the underlying LLM of the GAIA2 task agent, switching from Opus 4.6 to Haiku 4.5 ,while retaining the harnesses optimized with Opus 4.6 . As shown in Appendix E, AutoSaddler still improves over the base harness by +5.6 pp , suggesting potential transferability across models. To analyze optimization efficiency, we compare the optimization trajectories of AutoSaddler and the automated baselines on GAIA2 in Figure 1; a visualization of the full search trajectory of Au-toSaddler is provided in Appendix J. We find that AutoSaddler achieves higher performance with substantially fewer task-agent rollouts. Specifically, AutoSaddler reaches 72 .3% development accuracy with only ∼1,000 rollouts, whereas GEPA and Meta-Harness saturate at 64.6% and 61.5%, respectively, despite consuming ∼2,800 task executions (Figure 1a). The contrast is even sharper when efficiency is measured by the number of rollouts leveraged for learning (Figure 1b): AutoSad-dler reaches its best dev-set score after consuming 147 rollouts, ∼10 × fewer than Meta-Harness (1,400 rollouts). Similar efficiency gains are observed on TB2, as shown in Appendix H. We further characterize end-to-end optimization cost in Appendix I. Although AutoSaddler incurs moderately higher optimizer-side monetary cost per patch, its selective evaluation strategy reaches 67 .7% devel-opment accuracy with only 391 task-agent rollouts, already exceeding Meta-Harness’s 61 .5% peak after 1,400 rollouts. 

5.3 Ablation Studies and Analysis 

We next present ablation studies on GAIA2, focusing on the three key design principles underlying AutoSaddler: in-depth diagnosis , structured intervention , and generalization-aware selection .

RQ1: Does in-depth diagnosis enable superior root-cause identification? We first conduct an ablation study to assess whether in-depth diagnosis improves root-cause identification and ultimately contributes to overall performance gains. Specifically, we evaluate a “ w/o in-depth diagnosis ” variant that replaces CA-SDK-based diagnosis with a shallow diagnostic baseline: a single LLM call receives the execution trace and evaluation results, and infers the failure reason, a strategy commonly used in automatic prompt optimization pipelines for failure reflection [36, 1]. The inferred failure reason is then passed back to CA-SDK for patch generation. In contrast, AutoSaddler’s in-depth diagnosis actively explores both execution traces and source code to investigate failures. As shown in Table 2, removing in-depth diagnosis substantially degrades test-set performance on GAIA2, reducing Pass@1 from 62.0 to 57.8 . The benefit of in-depth diagnosis is further supported by the detailed file-access and tool-call analysis in Appendix K: compared with the patch-only session, the combined diagnosis–patch session invokes, on average, 6.2 additional tool calls and 5.8 additional file accesses per optimization step. We also quantitatively compare the cumulative number of accepted patches during training under the two settings, where an accepted patch is defined as one that improves performance on the same mini-batch; see Figure 10 in Appendix K. In-depth diagnosis consistently yields more accepted patches. By the end of Epoch 1 (Iteration 25), the gap is substantial 

> 4Because Meta-Harness does not natively support a train–dev split, we provide it with the union of the training and development sets to ensure comparable data exposure.

8(13 vs. 5), and this advantage is maintained throughout Epoch 2 (Iterations 26–50). Finally, we provide several qualitative case studies in Appendix K that illustrate how shallow diagnosis and AutoSaddler’s in-depth diagnosis differ in identifying root causes. Capability (C) Steering (S) 020 40 60 80 100 

> Distribution (%)
> 34.2 65.8 8.5 91.5 AutoSaddler w/o Struct. Interv.

(a) Capability vs. Steering. Rule Add. Rule Mod. New Tool Arg. Mod. Impl. Fix Desc. Fix Hook Infra. Chg. Loop Chg.       

> 010 20 30 40 50
> Distribution (%)
> 4881813 41 116 31 22 5732 22
> Prompt Patch Tool Patch Middleware Patch

(b) Patch subtype distribution. Rule Add. Rule Mod. New Tool Arg. Mod. Impl. Fix Desc. Fix Hook Infra. Chg. Loop Chg.       

> 020 40 60 80 100
> Acceptance Rate (%)
> 62 50 83 058 61 55 67 71
> Prompt Patch Tool Patch Middleware Patch

(c) Acceptance rate by subtype. 

Figure 3: Patch type distribution and acceptance: AutoSaddler vs. w/o Structured Intervention. 

Without structural intervention, patches collapse onto Steering (91.5%), while AutoSaddler produces a balanced mix spanning Prompt, Tool, and Middleware edits. 

RQ2: How does structured intervention shape patch diversity and effectiveness? To evaluate the effectiveness of structured intervention, we consider an ablated setting, w/o Structured Inter-vention , in which we remove the proposed patch taxonomy and phased patch scheduling. This ablation leaves the agent to perform unconstrained edits without explicit search-space boundaries (as in Meta-Harness). As shown in Table 2, removing structured patching substantially reduces Pass@1 on the GAIA2 test set, from 62.0% to 56.9% . This result suggests that framing harness optimization as a targeted structural search is critical for achieving meaningful performance gains. Fine-grained ablations in Appendix F further show that removing only Phased Patch Scheduling reduces Pass@1 from 60 .7% to 54 .8% , while removing the full structured intervention further reduces it to 53 .3% .Further analysis shows that the performance degradation in the w/o Structured Intervention setting stems from biased patch exploration and reduced patch diversity, despite allowing unconstrained patch edits. As shown in Figure 3a and Figure 3b, without structured intervention, the system becomes heavily concentrated on Steering patches ( 91 .5% ), which largely correspond to straight-forward textual edits, while rarely exploring higher-value interventions such as infrastructure or tool improvements. The varying effectiveness of different patch types is further supported by the acceptance-rate breakdown across patch subtypes in Figure 3c. Capability-centric, non-prompt-layer patches, i.e., New Tool (83% ), Loop Change (71% ), and Infra Change (67% ), achieve the highest acceptance rates. However, under w/o Structured Intervention , these critical patch types account for only 4% of generated patches; by contrast, AutoSaddler increases their share to over 25% through structured patching. Representative patches from these categories discovered by AutoSaddler during evolution are provided in Appendix L. Together, these results indicate that structured intervention encourages the agent to move beyond prompt-layer edits and explore capability-level improvements. Moreover, Appendix G shows that Capability Patches achieve a comparable fix rate to Steering Patches ( 55% vs. 58% ) while inducing substantially fewer regressions ( 8% vs. 17% ), suggesting more durable updates. 0 10 20 30 40 

> Iteration
> 010 20 30 40 50
> Fix Rate (%)

(a) Fix Rate (Base-Failed). 0 10 20 30 40  

> Iteration
> 010 20 30 40 50
> Regression Rate (%)
> AutoSaddler w/o Gen-Aware

(b) Regression Rate (Base-Passed). 0 10 20 30 40  

> Iteration
> 15
> 10
> 5
> 0510
> Net Gain (Fixes  Regressions)

(c) Dev-Set Net Gain. 

Figure 4: Performance comparison on the dev-set across iterations. AutoSaddler maintains a lower regression rate while achieving comparable fix rates to the w/o Generalization-Aware Selection 

ablation, yielding a consistently positive net gain that the ablation fails to sustain. 9RQ3: How does generalization-aware selection prevent overfitting? Finally, we conduct an ablation study to examine how generalization-aware optimization mitigates overfitting to the training set and reduces regressions on unseen scenarios. Specifically, the " w/o Generalization-Aware Selection " ablation removes both the reflection session and dev-set evaluation, forcing optimization to rely solely on training-set execution outcomes. As shown in Table 2, removing this component substantially degrades GAIA2 test-set performance, reducing Pass@1 from 62.0% to 50.6% . This is the largest performance drop among all component ablations. Fine-grained ablations in Appendix F further show that removing dev-set filtering reduces Pass@1 from 60 .7% to 50 .0% , while additionally removing Reflection with EvoDAG further reduces it to 44 .9% .To quantify how this mechanism affects dev-set behavior, Figure 4 tracks both settings on the dev-set and decomposes net performance into the fix rate , defined as the success rate on scenarios failed by the initial base harness, and the regression rate , defined as the failure rate on scenarios passed by the base harness. Notably, both settings achieve similar fix rates (panel a), indicating that the performance gap is not primarily driven by differences in problem-solving capability. Instead, the key divergence lies in the regression rate (panel b). Although both curves fluctuate during optimization, AutoSaddler exhibits an overall decreasing regression trend ( -0.24 pp/iter ), whereas the ablation shows an increasing trend ( +0.16 pp/iter ). We further examine the regression spike observed for the ablation at Iteration 21 (panel b) ( 8% →

22% ). At Iteration 20, the ablation introduces a new tool, send_progress_message_to_user ,and modifies the hook for the widely used send_message_to_user tool to forcibly redirect the agent to this new tool. Without reflection to assess collateral damage, this overly broad patch is retained, disrupting agent behavior across many unrelated development scenarios. Interestingly, the same failure pattern—an overly broad hook on a high-frequency tool that acts beyond its intended scope—also appears in AutoSaddler at Iteration 4 (see Figure 12b and the extended discussion in Appendix M). However, because of the reflection mechanism in AutoSaddler, such regression-inducing patches are blocked. This direct contrast demonstrates that generalization-aware selection helps sustain performance gains on unseen scenarios by identifying and filtering over-scoped patches. Lastly, Figure 4c shows the resulting net gain, indicating that AutoSaddler consistently outpaces the ablation after Iteration 20. This suggests that AutoSaddler can recover from early-iteration regression challenges and achieve steadier improvements in later iterations by abstracting generalizable principles from specific optimization lessons. Additional discussion of principle generalization and qualitative case studies is provided in Appendix M. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced AutoSaddler, an automatic harness optimization framework that for-mulates harness improvement for LLM agents as an offline learning problem over execution traces. AutoSaddler combines in-depth failure diagnosis, structured patch generation across prompts, tools, and middleware, and generalization-aware update selection via validation and EvoDAG-based evo-lution. As a result, it produces durable harness updates rather than trajectory-specific fixes. On GAIA2, SWE-Bench Pro, and Terminal-Bench 2.0, AutoSaddler consistently improves over the corresponding base harnesses by 9.0, 9.6, and 10.0 percentage points, respectively, and outperforms the strongest automated baseline on each benchmark by 7.4, 4.4, and 6.7 points. These results show that effective harness optimization requires deep debugging, targeted interventions, and explicit selection for generalization, positioning automatic harness optimization as a promising direction for building more performant and reliable long-horizon agent systems. 

## 7 Acknowledgments 

We thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions, which helped improve the clarity and quality of this work. We are grateful to Bo Qiao for his generous help with setting up the computing servers used for our experiments. We further thank the creators and maintainers of GAIA2, SWE-Bench Pro, Terminal-Bench 2.0, SWE-agent, Terminus 2, GEPA, and Meta-Harness for making their benchmarks, systems, and tools available, which enabled the experiments in this work. 10 References 

[1] Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alex Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [2] Huan ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Qihan Ren, Yiran Wu, Hongru WANG, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang, Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Cheng Qian, Zhenhailong Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A survey of self-evolving agents: What, when, how, and where to evolve on the path to artificial super intelligence. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. Survey Certification. [3] Anthropic. Effective harnesses for long-running agents. https://www.anthropic.com/ engineering/effective-harnesses-for-long-running-agents , 2025. Accessed 2026-04-21. [4] Anthropic. Agent sdk overview - claude code docs. https://code.claude.com/docs/en/ agent-sdk/overview , 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [5] Anthropic. Harness design for long-running application development. https://www. anthropic.com/engineering/harness-design-long-running-apps , 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [6] Zhicheng Cai, Xinyuan Guo, Yu Pei, Jiangtao Feng, Jiangjie Chen, Ya-Qin Zhang, Wei-Ying Ma, Mingxuan Wang, and Hao Zhou. FLEX: continuous agent evolution via forward learning from experience. CoRR , abs/2511.06449, 2025. [7] Mengzhuo Chen, Junjie Wang, Zhe Liu, Yawen Wang, Haiming Zheng, and Qing Wang. From failed trajectories to reliable llm agents: Diagnosing and repairing harness flaws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06324 , 2026. [8] Zhengyu Chen, Teng Xiao, Huaisheng Zhu, Yige Yuan, Luan Zhang, and Jingang Wang. Co-harness: Co-evolving harnesses and model weights for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.22688 , 2026. [9] Xiang Deng, Jeff Da, Edwin Pan, Yannis Yiming He, Charles Ide, Kanak Garg, Niklas Lauffer, Andrew Park, Nitin Pasari, Chetan Rane, Karmini Sampath, Maya Krishnan, Srivatsa Kundurthy, Sean Hendryx, Zifan Wang, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Noah Jacobson, Bing Liu, and Brad Kenstler. Swe-bench pro: Can AI agents solve long-horizon software engineering tasks? CoRR ,abs/2509.16941, 2025. [10] Romain Froger, Pierre Andrews, Matteo Bettini, Amar Budhiraja, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Virginie Do, Emilien Garreau, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Hugo Laurençon, Maxime Lecanu, Kunal Malkan, Dheeraj Mekala, Pierre Ménard, Gerard Moreno-Torres Bertran, Ulyana Piterbarg, Mikhail Plekhanov, Mathieu Rita, Andrey Rusakov, Vladislav Vorotilov, Mengjue Wang, Ian Yu, Amine Benhalloum, Grégoire Mialon, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia2: Benchmarking LLM agents on dynamic and asynchronous environments. CoRR , abs/2602.11964, 2026. [11] Jia Fu, Xiaoting Qin, Fangkai Yang, Lu Wang, Jue Zhang, Qingwei Lin, Yubo Chen, Dongmei Zhang, Saravan Rajmohan, and Qi Zhang. Autorag-hp: Automatic online hyper-parameter tuning for retrieval-augmented generation. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, Miami, Florida, USA, November 12-16, 2024 , Findings of ACL, pages 3875–3891. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. [12] Yu Ge, Linna Xie, Zhong Li, Yu Pei, and Tian Zhang. Who is introducing the failure? automatically attributing failures of multi-agent systems via spectrum analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13782 , 2025. 11 [13] Hanghui Guo, Weijie Shi, Zhangze Chen, Shengxiang Xu, Yishu Wang, Yimei Zhang, Wangze Ni, Jia Zhu, and Shimin Di. Drevo: Distilling recalibrated historical experience for harness self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.26722 , 2026. [14] Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and Yujiu Yang. Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. [15] Prannay Hebbar, Yogendra Manawat, Samuel Verboomen, Alesia Ivanova, Selvam Palanimalai, Kunal Bhatia, and Vignesh Baskaran. Sia: Self improving ai with harness & weight updates. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.27276 , 2026. [16] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic systems. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net, 2025. [17] Yue Huang, Wenjie Wang, Han Bao, Yuchen Ma, Xiaonan Luo, Yi Nian, Haomin Zhuang, Zheyuan Liu, Yue Zhao, and Xiangliang Zhang. Memoharness: Agent harnesses that learn from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.14159 , 2026. [18] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan A, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, Thomas T. Joshi, Hanna Moazam, Heather Miller, Matei Zaharia, and Christopher Potts. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into state-of-the-art pipelines. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [19] Shashank Kirtania, Param Biyani, Priyanshu Gupta, Yasharth Bajpai, Roshni Iyer, Sumit Gul-wani, and Gustavo Soares. Improving language agents through BREW. CoRR , abs/2511.20297, 2025. [20] KRAFTON AI and Ludo Robotics. Terminus-kira: Boosting frontier model performance on terminal-bench with minimal harness. https://github.com/krafton-ai/kira , 2026. [21] LangChain. Improving deep agents with harness engineering. https://www.langchain.com/ blog/improving-deep-agents-with-harness-engineering , 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [22] Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-harness: End-to-end optimization of model harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052 ,2026. [23] Jiahang Lin, Shichun Liu, Chengjun Pan, Lizhi Lin, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Xuanjing Huang, Hang Yan, Zhenhua Han, Tao Gui, et al. Agentic harness engineering: Observability-driven automatic evolution of coding-agent harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25850 , 2026. [24] Shu Liu, Shubham Agarwal, Monishwaran Maheswaran, Mert Cemri, Zhifei Li, Qiuyang Mang, Ashwin Naren, Ethan Boneh, Audrey Cheng, Melissa Z Pan, et al. Evox: Meta-evolution for automated discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23413 , 2026. [25] Xinghua Lou, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Antoine Dedieu, Carter Wendelken, Wolfgang Lehrach, and Kevin P Murphy. Autoharness: improving llm agents by automatically synthesizing a code harness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.03329 , 2026. [26] Guoqing Ma, Jia Zhu, Hanghui Guo, Weijie Shi, Jiawei Shen, Jingjiang Liu, and Yidan Liang. Automatic failure attribution and critical step prediction method for multi-agent systems based on causal inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08682 , 2025. [27] Ming Ma, Jue Zhang, Fangkai Yang, Yu Kang, Qingwei Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, and Dongmei Zhang. Dover: Intervention-driven auto debugging for LLM multi-agent systems. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. 12 [28] Mike A. Merrill, Alexander Glenn Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, Estefany Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Jenia Jitsev, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis-Mastromichalakis, Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann, Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu, Etash Kumar Guha, Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan, Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman, Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty, Michael Yang, Nabil Omi, Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin Wang, Wenhao Chai, Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Jesse Hu, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin Wang, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. CoRR , abs/2601.11868, 2026. [29] Nous Research. Hermes agent — the agent that grows with you. https://hermes-agent. nousresearch.com/ , 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [30] Alexander Novikov, Ngân Vu, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. CoRR , abs/2506.13131, 2025. [31] OpenAI. Harness engineering: leveraging codex in an agent-first world. https://openai. com/index/harness-engineering/ , 2026. Accessed 2026-04-21. [32] Krista Opsahl-Ong, Michael J. Ryan, Josh Purtell, David Broman, Christopher Potts, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. Optimizing instructions and demonstrations for multi-stage language model programs. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen, editors, 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2024, Miami, FL, USA, November 12-16, 2024 , pages 9340–9366. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. [33] Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long Le, Samira Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei Han, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2026. [34] Linyue Pan, Lexiao Zou, Shuo Guo, Jingchen Ni, and Hai-Tao Zheng. Natural-language agent harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25723 , 2026. [35] Wenbo Pan, Shujie Liu, Chin-Yew Lin, Jingying Zeng, Xianfeng Tang, Xiangyang Zhou, Yan Lu, and Xiaohua Jia. Evolving agents in the dark: Retrospective harness optimization via self-preference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.05922 , 2026. [36] Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt optimization with "gradient descent" and beam search. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali, editors, Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2023, Singapore, December 6-10, 2023 , pages 7957–7968. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023. [37] Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Tongcheng Zhang, Xinzhe Juan, Jiacheng Guo, Yifu Lu, Yimin Wang, Zixin Yao, Qihan Ren, Xun Jiang, Xing Zhou, Dongrui Liu, Ling Yang, Yue Wu, Kaixuan Huang, Shilong Liu, Hongru Wang, and Mengdi Wang. Alita: Generalist agent enabling scalable agentic reasoning with minimal predefinition and maximal self-evolution. CoRR ,abs/2505.20286, 2025. [38] Biswa Sengupta and Jinhua Wang. Harbor: Automated harness optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.20938 , 2026. 13 [39] Asankhaya Sharma. Openevolve: an open-source evolutionary coding agent. https://github. com/algorithmicsuperintelligence/openevolve , 2025. Accessed 2026-04-21. [40] Varun Ursekar, Apaar Shanker, Veronica Chatrath, Sam Denton, et al. Vero: An evaluation harness for agents to optimize agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22480 , 2026. [41] Chi Wang, Xueqing Liu, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Cost-effective hyperparameter opti-mization for large language model generation inference. In Aleksandra Faust, Roman Garnett, Colin White, Frank Hutter, and Jacob R. Gardner, editors, International Conference on Auto-mated Machine Learning, 12-15 November 2023, Hasso Plattner Institute, Potsdam, Germany ,Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 21/1–17. PMLR, 2023. [42] Wenyi Wang, Piotr Pi˛ ekos, Li Nanbo, Firas Laakom, Yimeng Chen, Mateusz Ostaszewski, Mingchen Zhuge, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Huxley-g\”odel machine: Human-level coding agent development by an approximation of the optimal self-improving machine. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [43] Xinyuan Wang, Chenxi Li, Zhen Wang, Fan Bai, Haotian Luo, Jiayou Zhang, Nebojsa Jojic, Eric P. Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Promptagent: Strategic planning with language models en-ables expert-level prompt optimization. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. [44] Yingxu Wang, Siwei Liu, Jinyuan Fang, and Zaiqiao Meng. Evoagentx: An automated frame-work for evolving agentic workflows. In Ivan Habernal, Peter Schulam, and Jörg Tiedemann, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing, EMNLP 2025 - System Demonstrations, Suzhou, China, November 4-9, 2025 , pages 643–655. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. [45] Chunqiu Steven Xia, Zhe Wang, Yan Yang, Yuxiang Wei, and Lingming Zhang. Live-swe-agent: Can software engineering agents self-evolve on the fly? CoRR , abs/2511.13646, 2025. [46] Minghao Yan, Bo Peng, Benjamin Coleman, Ziqi Chen, Zhouhang Xie, Shuo Chen, Zhankui He, Noveen Sachdeva, Isabella Ye, Weili Wang, et al. Pacevolve: Enabling long-horizon progress-aware consistent evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10657 , 2026. [47] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. [48] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In Amir Globersons, Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 10 - 15, 2024 , 2024. [49] Xunjian Yin, Xinyi Wang, Liangming Pan, Li Lin, Xiaojun Wan, and William Yang Wang. Gödel agent: A self-referential agent framework for recursively self-improvement. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2025, Vienna, Austria, July 27 - August 1, 2025 , pages 27890–27913. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. [50] Mert Yüksekgönül, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. Textgrad: Automatic "differentiation" via text. Nature , 639, 2025. [51] Guibin Zhang, Junhao Wang, Junjie Chen, Wangchunshu Zhou, Kun Wang, and Shuicheng Yan. Agentracer: Who is inducing failure in the LLM agentic systems? CoRR , abs/2509.03312, 2025. [52] Hangfan Zhang, Shao Zhang, Kangcong Li, Chen Zhang, Yang Chen, Yiqun Zhang, Lei Bai, and Shuyue Hu. Self-harness: Harnesses that improve themselves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09498 ,2026. 14 [53] Heng Zhang, Yuling Shi, Xiaodong Gu, Haochen You, Zijian Zhang, Lubin Gan, Yilei Yuan, and Jin Huang. Graphtracer: Graph-guided failure tracing in llm agents for robust multi-turn deep search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10581 , 2025. [54] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [55] Jenny Zhang, Bingchen Zhao, Wannan Yang, Jakob N. Foerster, Jeff Clune, Minqi Jiang, Sam Devlin, and Tatiana Shavrina. Hyperagents. CoRR , abs/2603.19461, 2026. [56] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xionghui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. Aflow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net, 2025. [57] Luan Zhang, Ruochen Zhou, Dandan Song, Zhengyu Chen, Yuhang Tian, Jun Yang, Huipeng Ma, Chenhao Li, Guangyuan Feng, Xudong Li, et al. Harnesscompass: Guiding auto-matic harness evolution toward generalizable and effective agent harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.01918 , 2026. [58] Shaokun Zhang, Ming Yin, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Zhiguang Han, Jingyang Zhang, Beibin Li, Chi Wang, Huazheng Wang, Yiran Chen, and Qingyun Wu. Which agent causes task failures and when? on automated failure attribution of LLM multi-agent systems. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp, Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors, Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2025, Vancouver, BC, Canada, July 13-19, 2025 , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2025. [59] Shaokun Zhang, Jieyu Zhang, Jiale Liu, Linxin Song, Chi Wang, Ranjay Krishna, and Qingyun Wu. Offline training of language model agents with functions as learnable weights. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine A. Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 60315–60335. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2024. [60] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: LLM agents are experiential learners. In Michael J. Wooldridge, Jennifer G. Dy, and Sriraam Natarajan, editors, Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2024, Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2024, Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2014, February 20-27, 2024, Vancouver, Canada , pages 19632–19642. AAAI Press, 2024. [61] Chenyu Zhou, Huacan Chai, Wenteng Chen, Zihan Guo, Rong Shan, Yuanyi Song, Tianyi Xu, Yingxuan Yang, Aofan Yu, Weiming Zhang, et al. Externalization in llm agents: A unified review of memory, skills, protocols and harness engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.08224 ,2026. [62] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net, 2023. [63] Kunlun Zhu, Zijia Liu, Bingxuan Li, Muxin Tian, Yingxuan Yang, Jiaxun Zhang, Pengrui Han, Qipeng Xie, Fuyang Cui, Weijia Zhang, et al. Where llm agents fail and how they can learn from failures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25370 , 2025. [64] Runchuan Zhu, Bowen Jiang, Lingrui Mei, Fangkai Yang, Lu Wang, Haoxiang Gao, Fengshuo Bai, Pu Zhao, Qingwei Lin, Saravan Rajmohan, and Dongmei Zhang. Adaptflow: Adaptive workflow optimization via meta-learning. In Christos Christodoulopoulos, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2025, Suzhou, China, November 4-9, 2025 , pages 3287–3302. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. 15 Traditional Mini-batch Training AutoSaddler Stage Interpretation                       

> Step 1: Sample mini-batch 1Sample mini-batch for evaluating current harness Same role Step 2: Run forward pass 1Execute the current harness The agent rollout is the forward com-putation. It produces both a final an-swer and a trajectory. Step 3: Compute loss 1Record outcomes and traces The task outcome provides the sparse metric signal; the trace provides evi-dence needed to explain the outcome. Step 4: Backpropagate gradients 2Diagnose and patch + 3verify on the same mini-batch AutoSaddler has no numerical gra-dient; it constructs a textual update through hypothesis generation on root cause, intervention, and verification. Step 6: Validate/checkpoint 4Evaluate on the dev-set Dev-set evaluation checks whether the candidate improvement generalizes beyond the mini-batch. Step 5: Apply optimizer update 5Reflect + 6store in EvoDAG +
> 7evolve the next harness The committed update is not merely the raw patch. AutoSaddler updates optimizer state and uses it to synthe-size the next candidate harness. Step 7: Repeat Next iteration The evolved harness is evaluated on a fresh mini-batch.

Table 4: Mapping between conventional mini-batch training and the AutoSaddler loop in Figure 2. AutoSaddler follows the outer structure of mini-batch learning but replaces differentiable gradient computation with trace-grounded symbolic optimization. 

## A AutoSaddler as Mini-Batch Learning over Textual Harness Parameters 

This appendix clarifies how the AutoSaddler loop in Figure 2 relates to the standard mini-batch training loop. The analogy is useful because AutoSaddler preserves the outer structure of mini-batch learning: it repeatedly evaluates a candidate system on a mini-batch, extracts an update signal, checks whether the update generalizes, and uses accumulated optimization history to propose the next candidate. However, the analogy should not be taken literally. Unlike neural parameters, harness parameters are textual, executable, and non-differentiable. AutoSaddler therefore replaces differentiable gradient computation with a trace-grounded symbolic optimization procedure. 

Mapping to traditional mini-batch training. Table 4 summarizes the correspondence. We denote the stages of traditional mini-batch training as Step 1–Step 7, and refer to AutoSaddler stages using the circled labels from Figure 2. 

Why backpropagation becomes diagnosis, patching, and verification. The central mismatch between the two settings lies in the analogue of backpropagation. In neural training, once the loss is computed, backpropagation provides a mathematically defined gradient. The update direction is therefore relatively well specified. In AutoSaddler, a failed rollout does not directly specify how the harness should change. The root cause may lie in the prompt, a tool interface, a tool implementation, a middleware hook, or the agent loop. The system must therefore infer a root-cause hypothesis from the trace, implement a targeted intervention, and empirically test whether the intervention improves behavior on the same mini-batch: diagnosis −→ patch-as-intervention −→ same-batch verification . (2) This sequence plays the role of constructing a credible textual gradient. Importantly, the patch at this stage is not yet best understood as the final committed parameter update. Rather, it is an intervention used to test whether the inferred root cause is plausible. This distinction is important because numerical gradients are derived from a fixed mathematical operator, whereas textual gradients are inferred, semantic, and fallible. Same-batch verification is therefore necessary to avoid treating an untested explanation as a reliable update direction. 16 Algorithm 1 AutoSaddler as mini-batch learning over harness parameters                                                                                          

> Require: Initial harness H0, training set Dtrain , development set Ddev , rollout budget K
> 1: Initialize EvoDAG G0with H0
> 2: for iteration n= 0 ,1,2, . . . until budget Kis exhausted do
> 3: Sample mini-batch Bn⊂Dtrain ▷Figure 2: 1; Step 1
> 4: Execute Hnon Bn, collecting outcomes and traces τn▷1; Steps 2–3
> 5: Diagnose failures in τnand infer root-cause hypotheses ▷2; textual credit assignment
> 6: Generate targeted patch ∆θn, yielding candidate H′
> n=Hn+ ∆ θn▷2; patch as intervention
> 7: Re-evaluate H′
> non Bn▷3; verify textual gradient
> 8: if same-batch performance improves then
> 9: Evaluate H′
> non Ddev ▷4; Step 6 generalization gate
> 10: end if
> 11: Reflect on before/after traces and evaluation results ▷5; convert evidence into lessons
> 12: Update EvoDAG Gnwith patch, metrics, and lessons to obtain Gn+1 ▷6; symbolic optimizer state
> 13: Evolve next harness Hn+1 from Gn+1 ▷7; Step 5 committed update
> 14: end for
> 15: return best harness selected by development performance

Why the optimizer update is reflection plus EvoDAG evolution. A second mismatch concerns the notion of an optimizer update. In ordinary training, the optimizer directly modifies numeric parameters. In AutoSaddler, the raw patch is only one candidate change. Before allowing this change to influence future search, the system must determine whether it is useful beyond the current mini-batch and what reusable lesson, if any, should be retained. This is why the committed update is better understood as dev-set validation −→ reflection −→ EvoDAG update −→ evolution of the next harness . (3) Reflection distills before/after evidence into reusable lessons, and EvoDAG stores these lessons together with patch descriptions and performance signals. The Evolution Session then uses this symbolic optimizer state to select, revise, or recombine components from previously explored harnesses when constructing the next candidate. In this sense, EvoDAG serves as a form of optimizer memory. Analogous to how momentum accumulates past gradient information to smooth noisy updates and steer future steps toward historically productive directions, EvoDAG accumulates past patches, outcomes, and reflections to guide harness evolution toward changes with evidence of generalizable benefit. Thus, AutoSaddler’s update is history-aware and compositional, rather than a single local arithmetic step. 

A note on ordering. The mapping above intentionally swaps the usual order of Step 5 and Step 6. In standard mini-batch training, one typically applies the optimizer update before validation or checkpointing. In AutoSaddler, development-set validation precedes the final symbolic optimizer update because EvoDAG is part of the optimizer state. Once a misleading lesson is stored, it can influence future evolution. Validation therefore serves as a generalization gate before the system commits lessons to EvoDAG and evolves Hn+1 .

Algorithmic view. Algorithm 1 presents the same view algorithmically. The key point is that the patch produced in 2 – 3 functions as an intervention for testing an inferred textual gradient. The final update to the search trajectory occurs only after validation, reflection, and EvoDAG-based evolution. 

Phased patch scheduling. We divide the patch types in Table 1 into two categories based on the type of harness change they make. Capability patches modify executable code or orchestration logic, including tool implementations, tool arguments, infrastructure settings, and agent-loop logic. These patches can change what actions the agent is able to perform or how the harness executes those actions. 

Steering patches are textual edits that leave the underlying executable code unchanged, including modifications to prompts, tool descriptions, and hook reminder texts. These patches primarily refine how the agent selects among existing capabilities and follows task-specific constraints. This distinction is analogous to, but not identical with, large versus small learning-rate steps in gradient-based optimization. Capability patches often behave like larger steps because they can introduce new functionality, change control flow, or alter the available action space. Steering patches often behave like smaller steps because they adjust the agent’s behavior within an already 17 established capability set. However, this analogy is only approximate: prompt or hook edits can sometimes produce large behavioral changes, especially when they affect high-frequency decisions. We therefore use the capability–steering distinction as a scheduling heuristic rather than a strict guarantee about effect size, and rely on verification and development-set validation to detect overly broad or regression-inducing changes. Motivated by this analogy, AutoSaddler adopts a two-phase schedule with transition point k:1. Exploration phase (n ≤ k). The search prioritizes capability patches to address fundamental gaps in tooling, infrastructure, and agent-loop behavior. 2. Refinement phase (n > k ). The search switches to steering patches to refine behavior after the capability set has stabilized. The transition point k can be specified directly as an iteration count or implicitly through the number of training epochs: 

k = E ·

 |D train |

B



,

where E is the number of capability-phase epochs and B is the mini-batch size. As in learning-rate scheduling, setting k too small may under-explore high-impact capability improvements, while setting it too large may delay lower-risk behavioral refinement. In our experiments, a single capability-phase epoch ( E = 1 ) works well, allowing the search to traverse the training set once with high-impact patches before switching to targeted steering adjustments. 

Takeaway. AutoSaddler can be viewed as mini-batch offline learning over externalized agent parameters. Its design differs from standard gradient training because harness parameters are textual and non-differentiable; the performance signal is sparse and delayed; and credit assignment across long-horizon traces is ambiguous. The additional machinery is therefore not incidental. Trace collection, diagnosis, patch-as-intervention, same-batch verification, development-set validation, reflection, EvoDAG memory, and evolution are the symbolic counterparts of the mechanisms that are compactly handled by loss functions, backpropagation, optimizer state, and checkpointing in traditional mini-batch training. 

## B Additional Details on Experiment Setup 

Implementation of EvoDAG. The DAG underlying EvoDAG can be implemented straightfor-wardly, but providing effective agent access to the DAG is more challenging: as candidates and traces accumulate across iterations, navigating EvoDAG directly becomes impractical. Rather than serializing the full DAG into the prompt, we introduce the evo-dag command-line interface (CLI) to facilitate interaction between the CA-SDK and EvoDAG. The interface provides on-demand access to the DAG’s structured summaries, including patch history, lessons learned, the scenario registry, and harness code diffs. This allows the agent to identify relevant context before drilling down into specific raw traces or source files for detailed analysis. The full command set is summarized in Table 5. 

Adapting Baselines to Our Benchmarks. GEPA treats the system prompt as a single unified string. By contrast, the default ReAct-based agent in GAIA2 distributes its system prompt across multiple sections, such as core behavioral principles, the ReAct JSON tool-calling format, and Meta’s Agents Research Environments (ARE) simulation-environment instructions. These sections are defined as separate variables and concatenated only at inference time, creating a structural mismatch that prevents the direct application of GEPA. To address this mismatch, we concatenate the sections into a single string, using ===== VAR_NAME ===== delimiters to mark section boundaries, and instruct GEPA’s reflection LLM to preserve these delimiters during prompt evolution. The evolved prompt is then split along the delimiters, and the resulting sections are passed to CA-SDK to update the corresponding variables. For SBP and TB2, we adopt SWE-agent and Terminus 2 as the base harnesses, respectively; since both agents define their system prompts as a single unified string, GEPA can be applied directly without further modification. The original Meta-Harness assumes that the harness is contained within a single Python script and requires inheritance from a fixed base agent class. In the GAIA2 default agent, however, the harness may be distributed across an entire repository. We therefore extend the Meta-Harness adaptation 18 Table 5: Commands exposed by the evo-dag CLI, grouped into read operations for scoped EvoDAG views and write operations for per-session node or scenario updates.                       

> Command Purpose When to use
> Read operations
> evo-dag summary DAG topology, best candidate, all edges Start of session; quick orientation
> evo-dag show history Full patch history: diffs, reflections, lessons Deep dive into prior attempts
> evo-dag show node <idx> Node details: scores, intent, verdict, output dirs Inspecting a specific candidate
> evo-dag show edge <parent> <child>
> Code diff, per-scenario impacts, files changed Understanding a specific patch
> evo-dag show scenario <id> Per-scenario history, root causes, at-tempted fixes Before diagnosing a failing sce-nario
> evo-dag show current-batch Current mini-batch scenario IDs and output dirs Orienting to the current iteration
> evo-dag show lineage DAG lineage with edge types Understanding branching struc-ture
> evo-dag show lessons Accumulated good/bad patterns Checking known patterns before patching
> Write operations
> evo-dag update-selection Record selected parent candidate(s) and the reasoning behind the choice Evolution Session, after parent se-lection
> evo-dag update-intent Record target scenarios, diagnosis, approach, files changed, and change summary Diagnosis-Patch Session, after ap-plying patches
> evo-dag update-reflection Record per-scenario status ( fixed
> /regressed /still_failing /
> still_passing ), root cause, post-patch explanation, prevention or next step, and generalization note Reflection Session, per scenario

to the repository level by instructing CA-SDK to apply the same patching procedure used in the original Meta-Harness across the full repository. This enables holistic harness optimization beyond the single-file setting. 

Benchmark-Specific Evaluation Protocol. For each benchmark, we follow its official evaluation infrastructure to ensure that the reported results are directly comparable to prior leaderboard numbers. 

GAIA2. We run the default ReAct-based agent through ARE using the are-run command, which executes each task in its corresponding sandboxed Universe and records the full trajectory. Following the GAIA2 protocol [10], we use Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct as the judge model to determine task success from the final agent state. 

SWE-Bench Pro. Following the official protocol of [9], each agent-generated patch is applied inside a per-instance Docker image preconfigured with the repository at the issue commit. The patch is then verified using the instance’s fail-to-pass and pass-to-pass unit tests. A task is counted as resolved only if all fail-to-pass tests pass and no pass-to-pass test regresses. 

Terminal-Bench 2.0. Following [28], we use Harbor to run each task in an isolated Docker container. Success is determined by a task-specific test script that inspects the final terminal and system state. 

Data Splits across Benchmarks. To evaluate whether optimized harnesses generalize beyond the tasks seen during optimization, we construct train, development, and test splits separately for each benchmark, as summarized in Table 6. For benchmarks with a natural grouping structure, 19 we split by task group rather than by individual tasks. In GAIA2, the split axis is the Universe ,where each Universe corresponds to a distinct persona and simulated digital environment. This design ensures that the test set contains tasks from groups unseen during optimization, providing a stronger measure of out-of-distribution generalization than random task-level splits. In SWE-Bench Pro, the split axis is the repository, which also induces shifts in programming language, codebase structure, and issue distribution. This design ensures that the test set contains tasks from groups unseen during optimization, providing a stronger measure of out-of-distribution generalization than random task-level splits. For Terminal-Bench 2.0, tasks span diverse domains but do not provide a natural grouping axis; we therefore use a uniform random partition into train, dev, and test sets. Table 6: Data splits across the three benchmarks. To evaluate generalization under distribution shift, we partition each benchmark such that train, development, and test sets contain tasks from disjoint task groups — Universes (personas) for GAIA2 and repositories (programming languages) for SWE-Bench Pro—rather than random task-level splits. Terminal-Bench 2.0 contains only 89 tasks across diverse domains and offers no natural grouping axis, so we adopt a uniform random partition.                                      

> Benchmark Split Axis Split Task Group # Tasks GAIA2 Universe (persona) Train Universe 29 75 Dev Universe 30 65 Test
> Universe 21 107
> Universe 22 112
> Universe 27 81
> SWE-Bench Pro Repository (language) Train qutebrowser (Python) 79 Dev Vuls (Go) 40
> NodeBB (JavaScript) 40 Test Ansible (Python) 96
> Flipt (Go) 85
> Element-web (TypeScript) 56
> Terminal-Bench 2.0 Random †
> Train —30 Dev —19 Test —40
> †Only 89 tasks across heterogeneous domains (system administration, machine learning, cybersecurity); no natural axis for distribution-shifted splits exists.

Optimization Budgets. For AutoSaddler and GEPA, we optimize for 2 epochs on GAIA2 and SWE-Bench-Pro, and for 4 epochs on Terminal-Bench 2.0; the doubled budget on TB2 compensates for its training set being roughly half the size of GAIA2. For Meta-Harness, applying the same epoch-based budget would be misleading: unlike AutoSaddler and GEPA, which perform mini-batch optimization, Meta-Harness operates in a full-batch regime, so a 2-epoch budget corresponds to only two patch updates and would unfairly handicap the baseline. To ensure a fair comparison, we instead match optimization budgets in terms of total task executions consumed during training. Concretely, we train Meta-Harness for 20 epochs on GAIA2 and 15 epochs on Terminal-Bench 2.0, and 8 epochs on SWE-Bench-Pro, ensuring its total task executions are no smaller than those used by AutoSaddler on every benchmark. 

## C Robustness to Optimization Stochasticity 

Our main experiments perform one optimization run for each method because end-to-end harness optimization is substantially more expensive than repeated test-time evaluation. To assess whether the observed gains are sensitive to stochastic optimization trajectories, we conduct an additional independent optimization run for AutoSaddler, GEPA, and Meta-Harness on GAIA2. We evaluate each resulting harness on Universe 22, the largest held-out test universe with 112 scenarios, using three repeated executions per harness. 20 Table 7: Robustness to optimization stochasticity . Pass@1 on GAIA2 Universe 22 for harnesses obtained from two independent optimization runs. Test performance is reported as mean ± standard deviation over three executions.                       

> Method GAIA2 Universe 22 (112 scenarios; Pass@1)
> Default Agent (Manual) 51 .5±4.9
> GEPA (Run 1) 47 .9±3.4
> GEPA (Run 2) 50 .6±0.5
> Meta-Harness (Run 1) 51 .5±5.2
> Meta-Harness (Run 2) 51 .2±2.2
> AutoSaddler (Run 1) 60 .7±2.4
> AutoSaddler (Run 2) 58 .6±0.5

Table 7 reports the results. The second AutoSaddler optimization run achieves 58.6% Pass@1, only 2.1 percentage points below the first run and 7.1 points above the default agent. It also outperforms the independently rerun GEPA and Meta-Harness harnesses by 8.0 and 7.4 percentage points, respectively. Although two optimization trajectories are insufficient for a comprehensive statistical characterization of the optimizer, the consistent gains across independent runs indicate that the improvement of AutoSaddler is not specific to a single favorable search trajectory. 

## D Robustness to Training-Distribution Shift 

Table 8: Robustness to training-distribution shift . Pass@1 on GAIA2 Universe 22 when Au-toSaddler is independently optimized using different training universes. Values are mean ± standard deviation over three test executions.              

> Method GAIA2 Universe 22 (112 scenarios; Pass@1)
> Default Agent (Manual) 51 .5±4.9
> AutoSaddler (Run 1; Universe 29) 60 .7±2.4
> AutoSaddler (Run 2; Universe 29) 58 .6±0.5
> AutoSaddler (Different Train Set; Universe 24) 57 .4±2.1

The main GAIA2 experiments optimize the harness using Universe 29 as the training set. To examine whether the resulting gains depend critically on this particular training distribution, we replace Universe 29 with the comparably sized Universe 24 and independently optimize AutoSaddler while keeping the remaining optimization and evaluation protocol unchanged. The resulting harness is evaluated three times on Universe 22. As shown in Table 8, the harness optimized on Universe 24 achieves 57.4% Pass@1. Despite being optimized using a different training universe, it improves over the default agent by 5.9 percentage points and remains within 1.2 points of the second independent AutoSaddler run trained on Uni-verse 29. These results suggest that AutoSaddler can discover effective harness updates from different persona and task distributions, rather than relying on properties specific to the original Universe 29 training split. 

## E Cross-Model Transferability to Weaker Agent Backbone 

While Table 2 reports results with Claude Opus 4.6 serving as both the optimizer and the agent backbone, a key practical question is whether harnesses optimized by a strong model retain their benefits when deployed with a weaker task agent. To test this, we re-evaluate all methods on GAIA2 using Claude Haiku 4.5 as the task agent backbone while keeping the harnesses unchanged from those produced during Opus-based optimization. Table 9 shows that AutoSaddler achieves an overall improvement of +5 .6 pp over the default agent, demonstrating effective cross-model transferability. Notably, AutoSaddler consistently outperforms all baseline methods and ablation settings across all evaluated universes. 21 Table 9: Cross-model transferability . Pass@1 success rates on the test-set of GAIA2 using Claude Haiku 4.5 as the agent backbone, with harnesses optimized by Claude Opus 4.6 . Values are mean ± standard deviation over three runs.                                                                                         

> Harness (Type) GAIA2 Universe (Pass@1) Avg. 21 (107) 22 (112) 27 (81)
> Default Agent (Manual) 31 .2±5.924 .4±1.436 .2±1.930 .0±1.8
> GEPA (Auto) 33 .6±1.924 .4±0.538 .3±1.231 .4±0.4
> Meta-Harness (Auto) 30 .8±0.026 .8±4.734 .2±4.030 .2±2.7
> AutoSaddler (Auto) 38 .3±0.030 .4±1.839 .1±2.635 .6±0.8
> w/o In-depth Diagnosis (Auto) 36 .1±5.519 .0±5.234 .2±0.729 .2±3.4
> w/o Structured Intervention (Auto) 32 .1±3.028 .0±4.037 .4±5.832 .0±3.5
> w/o Generalization-aware Selection (Auto) 28 .3±2.923 .2±4.130 .0±3.826 .9±1.3

## F Fine-Grained Ablations of Structured Intervention and Generalization-Aware Selection 

Table 10: Fine-grained ablations . Pass@1 on GAIA2 Universe 22. Values are mean ± standard deviation over three runs.                    

> Method GAIA2 Universe 22 (112 scenarios; Pass@1)
> Default Agent (Manual) 51 .5±4.9
> AutoSaddler 60 .7±2.4
> w/o Structured Intervention 53 .3±7.6
> w/o Phase Scheduling 54 .8±4.4
> w/o Generalization-Aware Selection 44 .9±6.7
> w/o Dev-Set Filtering 50 .0±5.0

The main ablations remove each design principle of AutoSaddler as a whole. We further disentangle the individual mechanisms underlying structured intervention and generalization-aware selection .For structured intervention, the main w/o Structured Intervention ablation removes both the patch taxonomy and Phased Patch Scheduling. We therefore introduce a finer-grained w/o Phase Scheduling 

variant that retains the patch taxonomy while removing only the phased schedule. Similarly, the main 

w/o Generalization-Aware Selection ablation removes both development-set filtering and Reflection with EvoDAG. We introduce a w/o Dev-Set Filtering variant that retains Reflection with EvoDAG but removes development-set filtering. For each variant, we rerun the full optimization procedure and evaluate the resulting harness on GAIA2 Universe 22 using three repeated test executions. Table 10 shows the results. Removing only Phased Patch Scheduling reduces Pass@1 from 60.7% to 54.8%, a drop of 5.9 percentage points. Removing the patch taxonomy in addition further reduces performance to 53.3%, indicating an additional 1.5-point contribution from structuring the patch space. For generalization-aware selection, removing development-set filtering reduces Pass@1 from 60.7% to 50.0%, while additionally removing Reflection with EvoDAG further reduces performance to 44.9%. Thus, development-set filtering accounts for the larger effect in this comparison, while Reflection with EvoDAG provides an additional 5.1-point gain. Together, these finer-grained ablations indicate that both mechanisms within each design principle contribute to final harness performance. 

## G Patch Durability Analysis 

A desirable harness update should not only repair the scenarios that motivate the patch, but should also preserve behavior that was already correct. We therefore analyze patch durability by comparing task outcomes before and after each generated patch on the same training mini-batch. We define the fix rate as the fraction of previously failing scenarios that pass after applying the patch, and the 

regression rate as the fraction of previously passing scenarios that fail after the patch. 22 We first group patches according to the three harness components used by the patch taxonomy: Prompt, Tool, and Middleware. As shown in Table 11, the three categories exhibit similar fix rates of 57–59%, while Tool patches have a moderately higher regression rate of 19%, compared with 14% for Prompt and Middleware patches. Thus, the component being edited alone does not reveal a clear durability pattern. Table 11: Patch durability by harness component . Fix and regression rates are measured by comparing pre- and post-patch outcomes on the same training mini-batch.         

> Patch Category Fix Rate (%) Regression Rate (%)
> Prompt 59 14 Tool 57 19 Middleware 57 14

One reason for the weak separation across these categories is that they mix different intervention mechanisms. For example, Tool patches include executable changes such as new tools and imple-mentation fixes, but also textual changes to tool descriptions. Similarly, Middleware patches include both executable infrastructure or agent-loop changes and text-only PreToolUse hooks. We therefore reclassify all generated patches using the higher-level Capability–Steering taxonomy from the main paper. Capability Patches modify executable functionality or orchestration logic, whereas Steering Patches alter textual instructions without changing the underlying executable capability. Table 12 reveals a clearer difference. Steering Patches achieve a slightly higher fix rate than Capability Patches (58% vs. 55%), but their regression rate is more than twice as high (17% vs. 8%). Capability Patches therefore obtain a comparable rate of local repairs while reducing regressions by 9 percentage points. This result suggests that capability-level interventions tend to produce more durable updates, whereas textual steering is more susceptible to spilling over to scenarios outside the intended scope. This quantitative pattern is also consistent with our qualitative examples: well-scoped executable fixes often address deterministic capability limitations, while overly broad hooks or prompt rules can affect unrelated scenarios. Table 12: Patch durability by intervention mechanism . Capability and Steering Patches exhibit similar fix rates, but Steering Patches induce substantially more regressions.       

> Patch Type Fix Rate (%) Regression Rate (%)
> Steering Patch 58 17 Capability Patch 55 8

## H Optimization Efficiency on Terminal-Bench 2.0 

To assess whether AutoSaddler’s optimization efficiency generalizes beyond GAIA2, we report compute and learning efficiency on Terminal-Bench 2.0, which targets a distinct agentic capability: long-horizon command-line problem solving. We follow the same protocol as in our main GAIA2 experiments (Section 5), comparing AutoSaddler against Meta-Harness and GEPA. Figure 5 reports compute and learning efficiency on Terminal-Bench 2.0. From the common 52.6% starting point, AutoSaddler reaches 73.7% dev accuracy after only 31 task executions and 12 leveraged traces, outperforming Meta-Harness (63.2%) by 10.5 percentage points and GEPA (57.9%) by 15.8 percentage points. The ∼8× reduction in leveraged traces relative to Meta-Harness (98 traces) mirrors the trend observed on GAIA2, indicating that AutoSaddler’s diagnosis-guided patching delivers consistent optimization efficiency gains on terminal-centric tasks where failures are dominated by tool-use and environment-interaction errors rather than multi-hop reasoning. 

## I End-to-End Optimization Cost Characterization 

Task-agent rollouts alone do not fully characterize the computational cost of automatic harness optimization. In addition to harness evaluation, each optimizer may incur substantial optimizer-side 23 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 

> Total Tasks Executed
> 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
> Best Dev Set Accuracy (%)
> AutoSaddler Meta-Harness GEPA

(a) Compute Efficiency 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700  

> Total Traces Leveraged for Optimization
> 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
> Best Dev Set Accuracy (%)
> AutoSaddler Meta-Harness GEPA

(b) Learning Efficiency 

Figure 5: Comparison of optimization performance and efficiency on Terminal-Bench 2.0. (a) 

AutoSaddler reaches 73.7% dev accuracy with only 31 task executions, whereas Meta-Harness requires 98 executions to plateau at 63.2% and GEPA reaches 57.9% at 90 executions. (b) When measured by the number of execution traces leveraged for optimization, AutoSaddler achieves its best performance after leveraging only 12 traces, over 8 × fewer than Meta-Harness (98 traces), while surpassing it by 10.5 percentage points. LLM overhead for candidate generation, diagnosis, patching, reflection, and candidate selection. We therefore separately profile (i) optimizer-side LLM overhead and (ii) task-agent evaluation cost on GAIA2. 

Optimizer-side cost. Table 13 reports the number of generated, rejected, and accepted patches together with the average wall-clock time, monetary cost, LLM calls, and token usage per generated patch. GEPA incurs the lowest optimizer-side cost at $5.50 per patch, but searches only over the system prompt. Meta-Harness and AutoSaddler instead optimize broader harness components and therefore provide a more direct comparison. AutoSaddler costs $14.56 per generated patch, $1.91 more than Meta-Harness, while requiring 533 seconds rather than 883 seconds per patch, corresponding to 39.6% lower wall-clock time. This difference holds despite AutoSaddler explicitly performing diagnosis, structured patch generation, reflection, and evolution. Table 13: Optimizer-side cost on GAIA2 . Runtime, monetary cost, LLM calls, and token usage are averaged per generated patch.                            

> Method Generated Patches Rejected Patches Accepted Patches Wall-Clock Time (s) / Patch Cost ($) / Patch LLM Calls / Patch Output Tokens / Patch Cache-Creation Input Tokens / Patch Cache-Read Input Tokens / Patch
> GEPA 76 58 18 386 5.50 21.3 11,416 156,788 280,940 Meta-Harness 520 ––883 12.65 66.9 43,429 250,466 3,528,484 AutoSaddler 39 19 20 533 14.56 76.1 21,464 430,933 3,246,158

Task-agent evaluation cost. Harness evaluation is considerably more expensive than the optimizer-side operations above. A single GAIA2 task-agent rollout requires, on average, 20.2 LLM calls, 550,988 input tokens, 7,380 output tokens, and 203.9 seconds of wall-clock time, as summarized in Table 14. Table 14: Average task-agent evaluation cost per GAIA2 rollout .

Metric Average per Rollout 

LLM calls 20.2 Input tokens 550,988 Output tokens 7,380 Wall-clock time 203.9 s 

> 5

Meta-Harness does not employ an explicit patch-acceptance gate; therefore, rejected and accepted patch counts are not applicable. 

24 The evaluation protocols of the methods differ substantially in how often this expensive operation is invoked. Meta-Harness evaluates the union of all 140 GAIA2 training and development scenarios for every candidate update. In contrast, AutoSaddler evaluates six training scenarios per optimization iteration and invokes the 65-scenario development-set evaluation only for patches that improve the training mini-batch. Consequently, AutoSaddler reaches 67.7% development accuracy after 391 task-agent rollouts, already exceeding the 61.5% peak reached by Meta-Harness after 1,400 rollouts. Thus, while AutoSaddler incurs moderately higher optimizer-side monetary cost per generated patch, this overhead is offset by substantially more selective use of expensive task-agent evaluations and higher performance under a much smaller rollout budget. 

## J Search Trajectory Visualization 

To illustrate how the reflection and evolution sessions jointly shape the search trajectory, Figure 6 visualizes the dev-score progression of AutoSaddler across 50 iterations (2 epochs) on GAIA2. Each node represents a harness that was accepted on its mini-batch and subsequently evaluated on the held-out dev set (21 of 51 total candidates); the displayed score is the dev-set accuracy. Solid edges denote base inheritance (thin gray for sequential, bold dark for rebase), while red dashed edges denote cherry-pick merges, the operations that lead to a DAG structure rather than a simple chain. The trajectory exhibits four phases. In the Foundation Building phase (Iter0–Iter8), the evolution session selects the single available predecessor at each step, producing a linear chain. In the Rapid Improvement phase (Iter8–Iter15), five consecutive accepts build linearly on each other, culminating at Iter13 (67.7%). The DAG structure emerges in the Selective Merging & Repair phase (Iter16–Iter27): after Iter20’s catastrophic regression to 33.8% caused by a hook on a high-frequency tool, the evolution session rebases to Iter13 and cherry-picks proven fixes from Iter13 and Iter14 into Iter21 and Iter22, while reverting harmful changes identified through reflection. Iter27 inherits these curated patches via a linear chain and achieves the global peak of 72.3%. In the Consolidation & Rebase 

phase (Iter31–Iter47), all branches rebase on Iter27. When Iter46 over-accumulates eight cherry-picked hooks and rules from Iter40/Iter44/Iter45, causing a −12.3 pp drop, the evolution session at Iter47 diagnoses this as collective steering overhead and prunes to only four conservative patches, recovering to 69.2%. Overall, this trajectory highlights how AutoSaddler uses reflection-guided rebasing and selective merging to preserve beneficial changes, discard harmful ones, and recover from regressions during harness search. 

## K Additional Analysis for RQ1 

Tool-Call and File-Access Overhead of In-Depth Diagnosis A central design choice of AutoSad-dler is the in-depth diagnosis stage, which is intended to perform a more thorough investigation of failure traces than shallow reflection as in the "w/o In-Depth Diagnosis" ablation setting. To verify that this stage indeed conducts substantively deeper analysis, rather than merely adding superficial overhead, we empirically measure the additional tool calls and file accesses that AutoSaddler expends compared to the ablation setting. In AutoSaddler, the Claude Agent SDK performs both diagnosis and patching, whereas in the ablated variant the SDK is responsible only for patching. The gap between the two therefore directly reflects the investigative effort attributable to in-depth diagnosis. Counting tool calls is straightforward, as each invocation of a Claude Agent SDK tool is logged. However, accurately counting file accesses is non-trivial because the Claude Agent SDK occasionally delegates work to sub-agents, and tool calls issued inside sub-agents are not recorded in the main trace. To ensure a consistent measurement across both variants, we count file accesses for the main agent using the following criteria: • File access through dedicated file tools. The number of invocations of the Claude Agent SDK’s dedicated file-handling tools, namely, Read , Write , Edit , MultiEdit , and Grep .• File access through Bash commands. The number of executions of shell commands that read or manipulate file contents, including cat , wc , grep , and Python invocations that open files (e.g., python3 or python scripts containing open() calls). The same accounting rule is applied to both AutoSaddler and the ablated variant, enabling a direct comparison of investigative effort. 25 Foundation Building Evolution Session selects the single predecessor each time (no alternatives to compare). Pure linear inheritance. Rapid Improvement Evolution Session continues from the best-scoring parent in each round. 5 consecutive accepts build on each other linearly. Selective Merging & Repair DAG emerges: I20's regression triggers rebase to I13. I21/I22 cherry-pick proven fixes from I13/I14 and revert harmful changes. I27 inherits these via linear chain best val (72.3%). 

Consolidation & Rebase All branches rebase on I27 (peak). I46: 8 cherry-picked hooks/rules from I40/I44/I45 cause 12.3pp drop. 

I47: Evolution Session prunes to only 4 conservative patches recovery. 

drop 

Peak: 72.3% 

Seed (base harness) Accepted harness Best: I27 (72.3%) Normal inheritance Rebase (switch base) Cherry-pick merge 

I0 

(47.7) 

I4 

> (49.2)

I8 

> (52.3)

I11 

> (58.5)

I12 

> (56.9)

I13 

> (67.7)

I14 

> (63.1)

I15 

> (55.4)

I16 

> (55.4)

I20 

> (33.8)

I21 

> (56.9)

I22 

> (66.2)

I23 

> (53.8)

I25 

> (63.1)

I27 

(72.3) 

I31 

> (66.2)

I33 

> (53.8)

I39 

> (64.6)

I40 

> (69.2)

I46 

> (60.0)

I47 

> (69.2)

Figure 6: Evolutionary search trajectory of AutoSaddler as the EvoDAG. Four phases (foundation, rapid improvement, selective merging, and consolidation) lead to a global dev-set peak of 72.3% at Iter27, escaping the Iter20 regression and local optima. Table 15 reports the average tool calls and file accesses per optimization step for AutoSaddler and the "w/o In-Depth Diagnosis" ablation setting. AutoSaddler performs 69.7 tool calls and 45.5 file accesses on average, compared to 63.5 and 39.7 for the ablated variant, corresponding to 6.2 additional tool calls and 5.8 additional file accesses per step. 26 Table 15: Average tool calls and file accesses per optimization step for AutoSaddler and its ablated variant without in-depth diagnosis. 

Method Avg. Tool Calls Avg. File Accesses 

w/o In-Depth Diagnosis 63.5 39.7 AutoSaddler 69.7 45.5 

∆ (Attributable to In-Depth Diagnosis) +6.2 +5.8 Task: Find and cancel the events tagged either 'Social' or 'Personal'. Additionally, for each day with at least one cancelled event, schedule a new "Volunteer Social Work" event at the same time as the cancelled event. Ask if unclear! 

(c) In-depth Diagnosis with Diagnosis-Patch Agent (b) Shallow Diagnosis with Single LLM Call            

> Step 3: Request clarification for days with multiple cancelled events (Nov 2: 2 events, Nov 6: 3 events)
> Step 1: Retrieve & delete events for tagged Social or Personal (8 events across Nov 4-8)
> Why it happened: The agent misinterpreted "for each day with at least one cancelled event, schedule a new event" as "for each cancelled event, schedule a new event." …
> What should have happened: For each day with cancellations, create exactly one "Volunteer Social Work" event at the time of the first (or earliest) cancelled event on that day. Days with cancellations: Nov 2, Nov 4, Nov 5, Nov 6, Nov 7 → but oracle expects only 3 add_calendar_event calls, suggesting perhaps only days with multiple cancellations or some other interpretation . Most likely: one VSW event per day, scheduled at the same time as the first cancelled event that day , yielding fewer total events.
> Trace Analysis:
> - Step 38 (reasoning): Agent explicitly plans "I need one new event per cancelled event at the same time" — misinterprets "at the same time as the cancelled event" (singular) as applying to EACH cancelled event rather than recognizing singularity implies one per day. Root Cause (Interpretation error): "at the same time as the cancelled event" uses singular "the event" — when multiple events exist on a day, this becomes ambiguous. Oracle expects clarification for days with 2+ cancelled events.
> Step 2: Create "Volunteer Social Work" events only for days with exactly one cancelled event (Nov 4/5/7: 1 event )
> Step 2: Created 8 events instead of 3

Gold Steps  

> Step 1: Success Step 3: Unreached

(a) Task Description & Gold Steps        

> Patch: None (reasoning issue). Patch: Add ambiguity-handling patterns & guidelines to Calendar Hook and system prompt.
> Iterative Exploration:
> ... [Multiple rounds of file access & reasoning] ...
> Action: Identify the calendar events and analyze them by date.
> Observation: Found 2 cancelled events on Nov 2 and 3 cancelled events on Nov 6, which were not explicitly detailed in the task prompt.

Figure 7: Case study on a calendar task with ambiguous cancellations, where AutoSaddler’s in-depth diagnosis accurately identifies the true root cause via deep debugging, unlike shallow diagnosis. 

Qualitative Case Studies. Figure 7 illustrates how this depth translates into diagnostic accuracy. In this task, the agent should have created new events only for days with a single cancellation (Nov 4, 5, 7) and requested clarification for days with multiple cancellations (Nov 2, 6). Instead, ignoring task ambiguity, it created new events for all canceled events. Without thorough investigation, shallow diagnosis incorrectly hypothesized that the agent simply misunderstood the instruction, concluding that it should have matched the time of the first cancellation on days with multiple cancellations. Consequently, it misclassified the issue as a simple LLM reasoning error and bypassed patching. In contrast, AutoSaddler identifies the calendar events and analyzes them by date, confirming multiple cancellations on Nov 2 and 6, and cross-verifies this with the oracle events. This enabled it to pinpoint the true root cause: the linguistic ambiguity of the singular phrase “the event”. It successfully resolved the issue by patching the calendar hook and system prompt with an ambiguity-handling guideline. Figure 8 illustrates a complementary failure mode in which shallow reflection produces a plausible-sounding but factually incorrect diagnosis. In this task, the agent should have located the existing 

benchmarks directory under Documents/ before creating sims3 inside it. Instead, the agent created 

benchmarks/sims3/ at the filesystem root without verifying where benchmarks actually resides. Shallow reflection diagnoses the failure as the agent’s use of an incorrect relative path despite knowing that the benchmarks are located under Documents/ , which is inconsistent with the agent’s actual behavior of never verifying the location at all. Consequently, it proposes a reactive patch that only modifies mkdir to emit a warning when the parent directory is newly created, leaving the agent’s lack of pre-verification untouched. In contrast, AutoSaddler inspects the agent’s filesystem trace and observes that the agent called exists("benchmarks/sims3") and immediately invoked 

mkdir on the same path without searching for the true location, then cross-verifies this against the environment filesystem structure to confirm that benchmarks resides at Documents/benchmarks/ .This enabled it to pinpoint the true root cause: the absence of parent-directory verification before 

mkdir and mv calls. It successfully resolved the issue by adding automatic path resolution to 

execute_tool_call() , eliminating the silent misplacement at its source. Figure 9 illustrates a case in which the failure stems from a candidate that the agent never observed. In this task, the agent should have detected two candidate rides on September 30 starting from a 27 Task: Please move all png format files from the Downloads folder to the "sims3" folder. If the "sims3" folder doesn't exist, create one in the benchmarks folder. 

(c) In-depth Diagnosis with Diagnosis-Patch Agent (b) Shallow Diagnosis with Single LLM Call 

Step 1: List PNG files in Downloads (complex_dag.png) 

Diagnosis: The agent created `benchmarks/sims3` but the oracle expected `Documents/benchmarks/sims3`. The agent used a relative path `benchmarks/sims3` without the `Documents/` prefix , and the `mkdir` tool judge rejected it as not matching the expected path. 

Root Cause: The agent used an incomplete path ("benchmarks/sims3") because it never verified where the "benchmarks" directory actually resides. The "benchmarks“ directory exists at "Documents/benchmarks/", not at the filesystem root. The `mkdir` tool silently created a new "benchmarks/sims3/" at the root level without any warning… 

Step 2: Locate “benchmarks” folder (Documents/benchmarks/) and create sims3 inside it ("Documents/benchmarks/sims3") 

Step 2: Assumed “benchmarks” folder at root without verification 

Gold Steps 

Step 1: Success 

(a) Task Description & Gold Steps 

Patch: Modify `mkdir` to return a warning string when the parent directory is newly created 

Patch: Add automatic path resolution in execute_tool_call() to locate existing parent directories before `mkdir` / `mv` calls. 

Step 3: Move complex_dag.png to “Documents/benchmarks/sims3/” 

Step 3: Fail (Cascaded from Step 2) 

Iterative Exploration: 

... [Multiple rounds of file access & reasoning] ... Action: Inspect the agent's trace for filesystem operations. Observation: The agent called exists("benchmarks/sims3") → False, then immediately mkdir("benchmarks/sims3") — never searching for where benchmarks actually resides. Action: Examine the oracle's expected events and environment filesystem structure. Observation: The benchmarks directory is located at Documents/benchmarks/ , not at the root Figure 8: Case study on a file-management task that requires moving PNG files into a sims3 

folder under benchmarks . Shallow diagnosis misattributes the failure to a relative-path error, while AutoSaddler verifies the filesystem and locates the true cause: an unverified parent directory. Task: Book a van to the railway station from my cab ride on the same day as my meeting with the Ecommerce Entrepreneur. Ask if unclear! 

(c) In-depth Diagnosis with Diagnosis-Patch Agent (b) Shallow Diagnosis with Single LLM Call 

Step 3: Detect ambiguity and ask user for clarification (which of the two railway stations to use) 

Step 1: Identify the contact who is an "Ecommerce Entrepreneur" and find the meeting with them (Sep 30) 

Diagnosis: The agent misidentified which meeting was "last month." Today is October 15, 2024, so "last month" is September. The agent found a meeting with Kuldip Saini on September 30 and matched the cab ride with timestamp ~1727695491 (Sept 30) starting from "Ahmedabad Railway Station." However, Kuldip Saini is retired (status: Retired), not currently employed as an "Ecommerce Entrepreneur" — his job description says he's a "retired entrepreneur." The task says "my contact who is an Ecommerce Entrepreneur," which likely refers to someone else, or the scenario expects no ride to be ordered because the cab ride identification was wrong. More critically, the evaluation says oracle expects 0 calls to `order_ride`, meaning the agent shouldn't have booked any ride at all — likely because there's an ambiguity or the agent got the wrong cab ride/station .

Expected vs Actual: 

Oracle expects 0 cab rides. The ride history contains 2 rides on September 30, 2024, both starting at railway stations (Ahmedabad Railway Station at index 5, Chennai Central Railway Station at index 19). Since there are 2 matching rides, the destination is ambiguous, and the agent should ask for clarification. 

Root Cause: 

Agent only retrieved first page of ride history (8 of 59 rides) via get_ride_history, 

missing a second ride on Sept 30 starting at a railway station (Chennai Central at index 19). The `get_ride_history` tool returns a paginated window. With 59 total rides, the agent would need 6+ API calls to scan all rides. Without a search/filter capability, the agent relied on a single partial page and missed a matching ride at a higher index. 

Step 2: Search ride history for cab rides taken on Sep 30 starting from a railway station (2 matches found: #5, #19 in ride history) 

Step 2: Overlook ride #19 and proceed to order 

Gold Steps 

Step 1: Success Step 3: Unreached 

(a) Task Description & Gold Steps 

Patch: Add ambiguity-handling guidance to the prompt. 

Patch : Add search_ride_history tool enabling filtered search over the full ride history by date, start location, and end location keywords. 

Iterative Exploration: 

... [Multiple rounds of file access & reasoning] ... Action: Examine the full ride history from the Cab app's environment state and filter rides by date. Observation: Found 2 rides on September 30 — one at index 5 (Ahmedabad Railway Station) and another at index 19 (Chennai Central Railway Station) — revealing an ambiguity that the agent missed 

Figure 9: Case study on a cab-booking task with two candidate rides on the same day. Shallow diagnosis overlooks the second matching ride and proposes an off-target fix, while AutoSaddler inspects the full ride history and identifies the missed candidate. railway station and asked the user to disambiguate the destination. Instead, the agent confidently booked a van using only the first matching ride, overlooking a second candidate at index 19. Without examining the full ride history, shallow reflection fails to recognize that a second matching ride exists at index 19 and instead produces a diagnosis centered on contact identification and oracle-call counts, missing the actual cause of the failure. Consequently, it proposes a fix that does not address the overlooked candidate. In contrast, AutoSaddler directly examines the full ride history from the Cab app’s environment state and filters by date, finding two rides on September 30, one at index 5 (Ahmedabad Railway Station) and another at index 19 (Chennai Central Railway Station), and cross-verifies this against the oracle’s expected zero order_ride calls. This enabled it to pinpoint the true root cause: the agent missed the matching ride at index 19 and thus failed to detect the destination ambiguity. It successfully resolved the issue by adding a search_ride_history tool 28 that enables filtered search over the ride history using date, start-location, and end-location keywords, surfacing conflicting candidates in a single call and triggering the correct clarification behavior. 

Accumulation of Accepted Patches. Figure 10 visualizes the cumulative number of accepted patches over training iterations, complementing the discussion in the main text. The results show that the gap between AutoSaddler and the ablation emerges early in training, by Iteration 25, and persists throughout Epoch 2. This confirms that the in-depth diagnosis component leads to more accepted patches and ultimately better performance. 0 10 20 30 40 50 

> Iteration
> 0246810 12 14 16 18 20 22
> Cumulative Accepted Patches
> 20 15
> AutoSaddler w/o In-depth Diag.

Figure 10: Cumulative accepted patches. AutoSaddler accumulates 20 accepted patches, whereas the w/o In-depth Diagnosis ablation reaches 15. 

## L Additional Analysis for RQ2 Fix a  Silent 

> Infrastructure Issue
> (iter 13 )

?

> Alarm

! 

> Alarm
> Create a Batch Query API
> (iter 11 )
> + @app_tool()
> + def get_crime_rates_batch
> +...
> Rewrite Hook:
> Prohibitive → Constructive
> (iter 27)
> {
> “hook":"Do not add unnecessary pleasantries or filler text."
> }
> {
> “hook":
> "Structure your reply naturally:
> (1) Brief acknowledgment …
> (2) Provide the core …
> (3) Optional closing phrase (4) Sign off with 'Best,\n[Full
> Name]’.”
> }
> Refinement Exploration

Figure 11: Representative patches discovered over the optimization trajectory. During the Explo-ration phase (Iterations 1–25 ), the search is dominated by Capability patches, including New Tool Addition, Implementation Fix, and Agent Loop Logic Change, which address structural limitations in the harness (e.g., Iterations 11 and 13 ). During the Refinement phase (Iterations 26 –50 ), the search shifts toward Steering patches that refine prompt rules, tool descriptions, and PreToolUse hooks (e.g., Iteration 27 ). Together, these two phases produce a cumulative 24 .6 pp improvement. The development-set optimization trajectory in Figure 11 illustrates the concrete mechanism behind Structured Patching and Phased Patch Scheduling. During the Exploration phase (Iterations 1–25 ), the search prioritizes Capability patches, which address structural limitations that cannot be resolved through prompt edits alone. For example, at Iteration 11 , AutoSaddler introduces a batched API, 

get_crime_rates_batch , that consolidates multiple serial queries and substantially reduces step-budget consumption. At Iteration 13 , AutoSaddler identifies an execution stall in the environment’s polling logic and resolves it by implementing a notification-based exit strategy. After these capability-level improvements stabilize the harness, the Refinement phase (Iterations 26 –

50 ) shifts the search toward Steering patches that fine-tune agent behavior. For instance, at Iteration 

27 , AutoSaddler replaces a prohibitive hook with a constructive response template, recovering cases 29 that had previously failed due to over-correction and reaching the peak dev-set accuracy of 72 .3% .Overall, the trajectory suggests that Structured Patching and Phased Patch Scheduling first expand the harness’s functional capacity and then refine its decision-making behavior, yielding a cumulative 

24 .6 pp improvement. 

## M Additional Analysis for RQ3 (a) Lessons About Generalizing Patches (b) Lessons About Overfitting Patches (c) From Lessons to Principles: The Temporal Maturation of Reflection Stage 1: Atomic Lessons Stage 2: Pattern-Level Lessons Stage 3: Generalization Principles                       

> Lesson (Iter 8): The `search_contacts` expansion to include `city_living` directly enabled finding all Mumbai contacts (9 instead of 1). Highly generalizable capability fix — applies to ALL contact-search-by-city scenarios.
> Lesson (Iter 11): TIES/SINGULAR-vs-MULTIPLE pattern in Rule 6 generalizes well to any superlative-reference scenario. The +6% improvement suggests
> the patterns generalize broadly across scenarios with superlative references.
> Lesson (Iter 14): The agent used all three new batch-query tools directly. Steps dropped from 80 (budget exceeded) to 36. The fix is deterministic without these tools, the scenario is mathematically unsolvable within the 80-step budget.
> Lesson (Iter 4): Overly broad hooks that fire on every call to a frequently-used tool (like add_calendar_event) are dangerous. They can cause widespread regressions on the dev set even if they fix specific mini-batch failures…
> Lesson (Iter 12): Rule 1's 'respond with ONLY the direct answer' is too broad — it may cause over-terse answers in dev set scenarios requiring detailed responses (availability slots, property details, multi-part answers).
> Lesson (Iter 15): Greeting stripping is a double-edged sword — n9ewlm needs it, y8x3mf is hurt by it. A more nuanced approach is needed (e.g., convert greetings to formal "Dear X," rather than stripping them)
> Lesson (iter 3): Consider a steering-phase hook on `reply_to_email` to guide reply content style (e.g., sign with user's full name).
> Lesson (iter 8): Critical finding: The hook matcher `EmailClientV2_reply_to_email` does NOT match the actual tool name `Emails_reply_to_email` — zero hook feedback messages appear in the trace
> Lesson (iter 19): Email composition quality remains a recurring theme across iterations
> (tnxtee, jvohtk, rkdpfj, y8x3mf) — agents add embellishments, use wrong greeting style, and provide bare sign-offs. A comprehensive steering fix (hook on Emails__send_email) for concise, formal email composition with full name sign-off would address multiple scenarios .
> Lesson (iter 27): Positive framing in hook guidance (e.g., "structure your reply naturally with acknowledgment → info → closing → sign-off") generalizes far better than negative framing ("don't add pleasantries"). The LLM overcorrects on negative instructions, stripping content that evaluators expect.

Figure 12: Reflection extracts lessons from (a) patches that generalize and (b) patches that overfit despite identical mini-batch outcomes. (c) The lineage of reply_to_email -related failures illustrates how atomic lessons gradually evolve into a generalization principle. We further investigate the mechanism underlying the regression gap between AutoSaddler and the "w/o Generalization-Aware Selection " ablation setting by examining the lessons extracted by reflection at each iteration (Figure 12). Two key observations emerge. First, panels (a) and (b) demonstrate that the reflection session, by jointly analyzing dev-set score fluctuations and patch contents, accurately differentiates between generalizing and overfitting patches. For example, reflection correctly endorses patches covering coherent scenario classes—such as a search-field expansion for city-based queries (Iter 8) or a tie-breaking rule for superlative references (Iter 11). Conversely, it successfully flags overfitting patches whose side effects spill over into unintended scenarios, such as a calendar hook firing indiscriminately on all event creations (Iter 4) or a conciseness rule damaging scenarios requiring structured detail (Iter 12). These accumulated judgments provide the crucial filtering signal consumed by the generalization-aware selection. Second, panel (c) traces a single problem—email reply quality—across four Iterations and shows that reflection’s knowledge of this problem changes form: from scenario-specific diagnostics (Iter 3 identifies the need for a reply hook; Iter 8 catches a matcher bug), to a pattern recognized across four scenarios (Iter 19), and finally to a scenario-independent principle on how steering text should be framed (Iter 27). What matures is not the problem itself but reflection’s level of abstraction over it—evidence of cumulative learning rather than repeated rediscovery. 

## N Catalog of Discovered Patches on GAIA2 

Table 16 presents representative patches between the base harness (the seed harness prior to opti-mization) and the final harness ˆθAS that AutoSaddler produces after training on GAIA2. Patches are grouped by category and sub-type following the taxonomy in Table 1; inserted text is highlighted in teal, and italicized base-harness entries indicate that the corresponding component or feature did not exist before the patch. 30 Table 16: Representative patches discovered by AutoSaddler on GAIA2, producing the final harness 

ˆθAS from the base harness. C = Capability, S = Steering. Inserted text is highlighted in teal. 

C/S Component Base Harness Final Harness ( ˆθAS )Prompt Patch (modifications to default_agent/prompts/system_prompt.py )Prompt Rule Modification 

S Rule 1 (Communication) 1. COMMUNICATION: Only message the user when completely done or if the task is impossible. 1. COMMUNICATION: Only message the user when completely done or if the task is impossible. When the user asks a factual question expecting a specific answer (a city name, a number, a person’s name, etc.), re-spond with ONLY the direct answer — no extra calculations, context, or formatting. S Rule 6 (Ambiguity) 6. AMBIGUITY: Execute all clear and un-ambiguous parts of a request immediately. When you encounter ambiguities, contra-dictions, or impossible elements, finish un-ambiguous subtasks and then stop and ex-plicitly ask the user for clarification before proceeding with those specific parts. 6. AMBIGUITY: Execute all clear and un-ambiguous parts . . . ask the user for clari-fication before proceeding with those spe-cific parts. A subtask is CLEAR if all its required tool parameters (recipients, con-tent, IDs, paths) can be fully determined — even if it semantically relates to an am-biguous part. Common ambiguity patterns that REQUIRE clarification: (a) TIES — when the task references ‘the item with the highest/lowest X’ but multiple items are tied at that value; (b) SINGULAR vs MULTIPLE — when the task uses singular language (‘the event’, ‘the property’) but multiple items match the criteria; (c) PER-GROUP vs PER-ITEM — when applying an action ‘for each day/group’ at a time de-rived from a singular source, but multiple sources exist within that group. 

Prompt Rule Addition 

S Rule 7 (Task Decomposition) 

(rule does not exist) 7. TASK DECOMPOSITION: When the user’s request contains multiple ordered steps (signaled by words like “then”, “af-ter that”, “next”, “afterwards”), treat each step as a separate subtask. Complete each subtask fully before moving to the next. If a later subtask has ambiguities but earlier subtasks are clear, execute all clear subtasks first, then ask about the ambiguous ones. CRITICAL: Ordering words create HARD DEPENDENCY BOUNDARIES — sub-tasks after the boundary MUST NOT be executed until all preceding subtasks are completed, even if the later subtask’s pa-rameters are fully determinable. 

Tool Patch 

New Tool Addition 

C CityApp. get_crime_rates_batch 

(tool does not exist) get_crime_rates_batch( zip_codes: list[str]) -> dict 

Batch crime-rate lookup over many zip codes in a single call; replaces N serial queries that exhausted the step budget. C EmailClientApp. get_email_addresses_ in_folder 

(tool does not exist) get_email_addresses_in_folder( folder_name: str = "INBOX") -> dict 

Returns all unique sender/recipient ad-dresses in a folder for fast contact discovery. 

(continued on next page) 

31 (Table 16 continued from previous page) 

C/S Component Base Harness Final Harness ( ˆθAS )

C MessagingApp. get_all_participants 

(tool does not exist) get_all_participants() -> dict 

Returns all unique participant names across conversations, excluding “Me”. C MessagingAppV2. get_all_participants 

(tool does not exist) get_all_participants() -> dict 

V2 analog: returns unique participant IDs, excluding the current user. C CabApp. search_ride_history 

(tool does not exist; only paginated 

get_ride_history was available) 

search_ride_history( date: str | None = None, start_location_keyword: str | None = None, end_location_keyword: str | None = None) -> dict 

Searches the full ride history with optional filters in one call. 

Implementation Fix 

C ContactsApp. search_contacts 

Searches first_name ,

last_name , phone_number ,

email only. Additionally searches 

city_living , country ,

nationality , job , address ,enabling city- and role-based contact lookup. 

Middleware Patch 

PreToolUse Hook 

S Emails__ reply_to_email 

(reminder text in 

hook.json )“Do not add unnecessary pleasantries or filler text.” (prohibitive: triggers over-correction — agent strips content evaluators expect.) “Structure your reply naturally: (1) brief acknowledgment, (2) provide the core infor-mation, (3) optional closing phrase, (4) sign off with ‘Best,\n[Full Name]’.” (constructive: provides a positive structural template.) 

Agent Loop Logic Change 

C are_simulation_ main.py 

(agent loop) The benchmark environment does not no-tify the agent of cab status changes (e.g., de-lays). Without a mechanism to advance sim-ulated time between turns, the agent loop stalls indefinitely, unable to reach the point where it could proactively discover these state changes. AutoSaddler resolves the stall by inserting an inter-turn time-advancement call: when no messages are pending, the loop invokes 

wait_for_notification( timeout=300) to fast-forward simulated time by up to 300 seconds. If no notification arrives, the timeout itself wakes the agent, prompting it to proactively poll for state changes. C _resolve_fs_path 

in execute_ tool_call() 

on *__mkdir (path ), 

*__mv (path2 )

path="benchmarks/sims3" 

(no automatic resolution: mkdir silently creates a new benchmarks/sims3/ at the filesystem root, despite an existing 

Documents/benchmarks/ elsewhere.) 

path="Documents/ benchmarks/sims3" 

(automatic path resolution: locates existing parent directories with the same basename via filesystem search before mkdir /mv is invoked.) 

## O Catalog of Discovered Patches on Terminal-Bench 2.0 

Table 17 presents representative patches between the base harness (the seed harness prior to opti-mization) and the final harness ˆθAS that AutoSaddler produces after training on Terminal-Bench 2.0. Patches are grouped by category and sub-type following the taxonomy in Table 1; inserted text is highlighted in teal, and italicized base-harness entries indicate that the corresponding component or feature did not exist before the patch. 32 Table 17: Representative patches discovered by AutoSaddler on Terminal-Bench 2.0, producing the final harness ˆθAS from the base harness. C = Capability, S = Steering. Inserted text is highlighted in teal. 

C/S Component Base Harness Final Harness ( ˆθAS )Prompt Patch (modifications to the system prompt template prompt-templates/verify-before-complete.txt )Prompt Rule Addition 

S Verification before completion 

(no verification guidance; the base prompt ends immediately after the format specification) 

CRITICAL – Verification before comple-tion: You MUST verify your solution works before setting "task_complete": true .When setting up services, test endpoints. When creating files, verify contents. Verify file permissions for all service users. Per-form a dry run of automated hooks. If ver-ification fails, fix and verify again before completing. S Different-input testing & build-artifact clean-up 

(rule does not exist) For scripts or programs, test with a DIF-FERENT input than the provided example to confirm generalizability. After testing, clean up the output directory: remove any build artifacts (compiled binaries, .o files), temporary files, or intermediate outputs that the task did NOT ask you to create. Verifiers often check that output directories contain ONLY the expected files. S Library preference 

(rule does not exist) When writing scripts, check the terminal output for pre-installed packages and pre-fer established libraries over fragile custom implementations. S HTML sanitization 

(rule does not exist) For HTML sanitization / XSS filter-ing, ALWAYS use BeautifulSoup (not regex). Decompose dangerous tags (script , noscript , iframe , object ,

embed , frame , style ) and do a string re-placement to strip javascript: from en-tire output as final safety pass. 

Tool Patch 

Argument Modification 

C _limit_output_ length 

(max_bytes 

parameter) 

_limit_output_length( output, max_bytes=10000) 

Default 10 KB limit truncates large file con-tents or command outputs, causing the agent to miss critical information. 

_limit_output_length( output, max_bytes=30000) 

30 KB limit provides more room while keep-ing context manageable. 

Implementation Fix 

C _get_prompt_ template_path 

(prompt template selection) Returns the default 

Terminus-2 prompt template path. The default prompt contains only JSON for-mat specification without domain-specific guidance. Returns path to 

verify-before-complete.txt 

Custom prompt template that includes veri-fication guidance, library-preference rules, and coding best practices alongside the stan-dard format specification. 

Middleware Patch 

PreToolUse Hook (continued on next page) 

33 (Table 17 continued from previous page)              

> C/S Component Base Harness Final Harness ( ˆθAS )
> S_get_completion_ confirmation_ message
> (completion confirmation) “Current terminal state:\n{output}\n \n Are you sure you want to mark the task as com-plete? This will trigger your solution to be graded and you won’t be able to make any further corrections. ” (generic confirmation; agent often skips ver-ification) “Current terminal state:\n{output}\n \n STOP – You must verify your solution be-fore confirming completion.\n For service tasks: test endpoints, verify permissions.\n For coding tasks: test with a DIFFERENT input, verify output structure.\n Clean up: remove build artifacts the task did NOT re-quest.” (structured verification checklist with task-type-specific guidance)
> Agent Loop Logic Change
> Crun()
> (environment discovery) Agent starts with no knowledge of what packages are pre-installed in the Docker container. Frequently chooses fragile custom implementations (e.g., regex for HTML) over established libraries that are already available. Before the agent loop begins, pip list --format=columns is executed in the con-tainer so the initial terminal state shows all pre-installed Python packages. The agent can then choose appropriate libraries (e.g., BeautifulSoup over regex) from the start.

## P Instructions Used In AutoSaddler 

To ensure reproducible and principled optimization, AutoSaddler employs a multi-session orchestra-tion design where each session is guided by a specialized prompt template. These instructions are designed to operationalize the core pillars of our framework: in-depth debugging, structured harness intervention, and generalization-aware selection. The Diagnosis-Patch Session (Figure 13) initiates the optimization loop by grounding the agent in the current mini-batch failures. Unlike simple reflection-based approaches, this prompt enforces a rigorous "diagnose-before-patch" workflow. It provides the agent with access to raw execution traces alongside the harness codebase and mandates the use of specialized skills (e.g., history-analysis ,

diagnose ) to identify the underlying root causes. Furthermore, it implements our phased scheduling by restricting the agent to either capability or steering patches, ensuring that interventions are targeted and architecturally sound. The Reflection Session (Figure 14) focuses on causal attribution and the extraction of durable lessons. The prompt instructs the agent to perform a comparative analysis of pre- and post-patch execution traces for every scenario in the mini-batch. A key feature of this session is the mandatory "stochasticity check", where the agent must distinguish between true causal fixes/regressions and stochastic artifacts caused by LLM non-determinism. By categorizing outcomes into four states ( fixed, regressed, still-failing, still-passing ) and recording detailed evidence in the EvoDAG, this session ensures that only verified insights drive the evolution process. Finally, the Evolution Session (Figure 15) serves as the framework’s meta-optimizer. It provides the agent with a global view of the EvoDAG history, including accumulated lessons, performance metrics across development sets, and code diffs from prior iterations. The prompt guides the agent to synthesize the next harness candidate not just by incremental editing, but by potentially merging successful components from different lineages or reverting regressive updates. This session ensures that the resulting harness base is stable, verified for syntax and logic, and optimized for broad generalization across the task distribution. 

Diagnosis-Patch Prompt   

> ## Mandatory Skills You MUST read and follow the SKILL.md for each skill listed below. Do NOT skip or summarize any skill –- execute the full procedure described in each one. These skills are installed at ‘.claude/skills/<n>/SKILL.md‘ in the current worktree. | Order | Skill | When | Why | |–––-|–––-|–––|––-|

34 (continued) 

| 1 | ‘history-analysis‘ | Before any other work (Step 1) | Structured analysis of the full evolution history –- identifies relevant lessons, prior attempts, proven strategies, and regression-prone areas | | 2 | ‘diagnose‘ | Before applying any patch (Step 2) | Root-cause analysis from agent traces and codebase –- pinpoints exactly why each failing scenario fails | | 3 | ‘capability-patch‘ or ‘steering-patch‘ | When applying patches (Step 3) | Phase-appropriate patch methodology –- ‘capability-patch‘ during capability phase, ‘steering-patch‘ during steering phase. Follow the skill matching the current phase | | 4 | ‘patch-verification‘ | After applying all patches (Step 4) | Crash-safety verification –- syntax, imports, docstrings, hooks, logic. A crashing patch is worse than no patch | > Enforcement: Every step above is mandatory and sequential. Do NOT apply patches without first completing diagnosis. Do NOT finish the session without running the full ‘patch-verification‘ procedure. Do NOT skip ‘history-analysis‘ –- it prevents repeating known failures. ## Goal Fix failing scenarios in this mini-batch by diagnosing root causes from execution traces and the agent codebase, then applying targeted code patches –- without regressing scenarios that already pass. Each scenario is a task the agent must solve. The initial evaluation on the mini-batch has already run the agent on each scenario and recorded its execution trace: every tool call, every response, and every reasoning step. Your job is to read these traces alongside the agent codebase, identify why the agent failed, determine what code change would fix the root cause, and apply it. The optimization objective is to maximize performance across the full task distribution –- not just this mini-batch. Patches should address general behavioral patterns, not hardcode scenario-specific answers. A patch that fixes one scenario by adding a general rule will also help similar unseen scenarios; a patch that hardcodes a specific answer helps only that one scenario and may harm others. Acceptance: A patch is accepted if the sum of re-evaluation scores exceeds the sum of initial scores. Even fixing a single scenario is enough. However, regressions (passing 

→ failing) are recorded as bad patterns –- avoid them. ## Context - Iteration: {iteration} - Candidate: C{candidate_idx} - Current worktree: ‘{worktree_path}‘ - Base parent: C{base_parent_idx} (worktree: ‘{parent_worktree}‘) {cherry_pick_parents_section}- Phase: {phase} - Initial evaluation output: ‘{before_output_dir}‘ ## Current Mini-Batch ({num_scenarios} scenarios) {mini_batch_listing} ### Initial Scores (pass rate: {before_pass_rate}) {before_scores_listing} ## Patch Types for This Phase {patch_types_section} ## Workflow ### 1. Analyze history MANDATORY first step. Run the ‘history-analysis‘ skill to build a structured understanding of the full evolution history. Do NOT skip this step or truncate ‘evo-dag show history‘ with ‘head‘/‘tail‘. The skill provides the methodology for reading the complete history without truncation. Focus on: - Relevant lessons (good/bad patterns) for the current mini-batch - Prior attempts on the failing scenarios –- what worked and what failed - Proven patch strategies and regression-prone areas ### 2. Diagnose failing scenarios For each failing scenario, use the ‘diagnose‘ skill to identify the root cause. The key is to find why the agent made the wrong decision, not just what went wrong. Diagnosis requires reading both the execution trace and the agent codebase. Trace files (output dir: ‘{before_output_dir}‘): See CLAUDE.md’s Iteration Output Structure section for the exact file layout. Key files to read: 

35 (continued) 

- Evaluation rationale: Per-scenario scores and judge rationale –- the evaluator’s summary of what was expected vs what the agent produced. - Agent execution traces: Per-scenario full tool call, response, and reasoning traces –-where you find the exact point where the agent diverged from correct behavior. Agent codebase: current worktree ‘{worktree_path}‘ The ‘diagnose‘ skill provides the full methodology –- follow it for each failing scenario. ### 3. Apply patches Based on your diagnosis, use the phase-appropriate patch skill: - Capability phase (‘capability-patch‘): Expand what the agent CAN DO –- new tool methods, parameter additions, implementation fixes, infrastructure changes. These unlock scenarios that are unreachable through prompt tuning alone. - Steering phase (‘steering-patch‘): Refine HOW the agent behaves –- prompt rules, tool description corrections, PreToolUse hooks. These fine-tune the agent’s use of existing capabilities. Patch guidelines: - Target the root cause, not the symptom. If the agent sends a wrong email subject, the fix is a general rule about deriving subjects from user wording –- not hardcoding the correct subject for one scenario. - Keep patches generalizable. Rules should be abstract: no scenario IDs, no specific names, no hardcoded answers. A good patch helps all scenarios that share the same root cause pattern. - Align agent-facing text with capability changes. When you add or modify tools, parameters, or infrastructure code, also update the system prompt, tool docstrings, and/or hooks so the agent is aware of the changes. Check for conflicting rules. - Learn from patch history. Check ‘evo-dag show history‘ –- it contains diffs, per-scenario results, reflections, and accumulated lessons. Use it to understand: which patches generalized well to the dev set, which caused regressions, which root-cause patterns were effectively resolved, and which approaches repeatedly failed. Build on proven strategies and avoid repeating known bad patterns. - Prefer replacement over addition when modifying prompts. The system prompt has a finite attention budget –- adding rules without removing or merging existing ones dilutes their impact. ### 4. Verify patches After applying all patches, you MUST run the ‘patch-verification‘ skill to ensure the patched codebase has no runtime errors. A patch that crashes at runtime is worse than no patch –- verification is mandatory before committing. Do NOT skip this step under any circumstances. ### 5. Write reasoning and record intent After applying all patches, write your reasoning to ‘proposer_reasoning.md‘ in the working directory root. For each targeted scenario, include: task description, expected vs actual behavior, trace analysis (which step went wrong), root cause, and resolution strategy (generalizable rule). This sharpens the ‘–diagnosis‘ that propagates to future iterations via ‘evo-dag show history‘. Then record intent: “‘bash evo-dag update-intent \ –target-scenarios "id1,id2" \ –diagnosis "Root cause analysis of why target scenarios fail" \ –approach "Brief description of the patch approach" \ –files-changed "f1.py,f2.py" \ –change-summary "What was changed and why" “‘ CRITICAL: You MUST run ‘evo-dag update-intent‘ before finishing this session. Failure to do so will result in incomplete iteration records and degrade the quality of future iterations’ patch history analysis. ## What Happens Next After this session, the outer loop re-evaluates the patched worktree on the same mini-batch, computes initial/re-evaluation per-scenario impacts (fixed, regressed, still_failing, still_passing), and records the patch verdict. If the patch is accepted (re-evaluation score > initial score), the candidate is also evaluated on the full 

36 (continued) 

dev-set to measure generalizability. Then Session 2 (Reflection) runs, where you analyze the results and record structured reflections for each scenario. 

Figure 13: Diagnosis-Patch Session Prompt: agent receives the current mini-batch’s failing scenarios with execution traces, diagnoses root causes via the agent codebase, and applies targeted, generalizable patches to the existing harness. 

Reflection Session Prompt 

## Mandatory Skills You MUST read and follow the SKILL.md for each skill listed below. Do NOT skip or summarize any skill –- execute the full procedure described in each one. These skills are installed at ‘.claude/skills/<n>/SKILL.md‘ in the current worktree. | Order | Skill | When | Why | |–––-|–––-|–––|––-| | 1 | ‘history-analysis‘ | Before any other work (Step 1) | Structured analysis of the full evolution history –- provides historical context for each scenario, pattern evolution, and dev score attribution needed for meaningful reflections | | 2 | ‘diagnose‘ | For every regressed AND fixed scenario (Step 3) | Causal attribution –- determines whether each state change (PASS ↔FAIL) was truly caused by the patch or is a stochastic artifact from LLM non-determinism. Accurate classification is critical to avoid polluting lessons with false signal | > Enforcement: Do NOT attribute any state change to "stochastic noise" or "LLM non-determinism" without running the full ‘diagnose‘ skill procedure. Every fixed/regressed classification must cite specific evidence from the diagnosis. ## Goal Analyze the initial/re-evaluation results for every scenario in the mini-batch and record structured reflections that future iterations can learn from. Your reflections feed directly into ‘evo-dag show history‘ –- the primary knowledge store that future iterations consult when diagnosing failures, choosing patch strategies, and avoiding past mistakes. The quality of your reflections determines how effectively the pipeline learns. Be specific: reference exact tool calls, code paths, and behavioral patterns. Vague reflections waste learning potential. ## Context - Iteration: {iteration} - Candidate: C{candidate_idx} - Current worktree: ‘{worktree_path}‘ - Base parent: C{base_parent_idx} (worktree: ‘{parent_worktree}‘) - Phase: {phase} - Initial evaluation output: ‘{before_output_dir}‘ - Re-evaluation output: ‘{train_after_cycle_dir}‘ ## Session 1 Reasoning The following is the proposer’s diagnosis and patch rationale from Session 1. Use this to understand the intent behind the patch –- what root causes were identified, what the patch was designed to fix, and what behavioral changes were expected. {proposer_reasoning} ## Results Summary {results_summary} ## Per-Scenario Details {per_scenario_details} {generalization_section} ## The Four Outcomes | Before | After | Status | Key Question | |––––|–––-|––––|––––––-| | FAIL | PASS | ‘fixed‘ | What root cause did the patch resolve? How? || PASS | FAIL | ‘regressed‘ | What did the patch break? Why? || FAIL | FAIL | ‘still_failing‘ | Why was the patch insufficient? What to try next? || PASS | PASS | ‘still_passing‘ | Did the patch interact with this scenario at all? |## Workflow 

37 (continued) 

### 1. Analyze history MANDATORY first step. Run the ‘history-analysis‘ skill to build a structured understanding of the full evolution history. Do NOT skip this step or truncate ‘evo-dag show history‘ with ‘head‘/‘tail‘. The skill provides the methodology for reading the complete history without truncation. Focus on: - Historical context for each scenario in the mini-batch - Pattern evolution –- emerging patterns not yet captured in lessons - Dev score attribution –- which patches improved/hurt dev accuracy and why This context is essential for writing meaningful reflections –- you need to know what was tried before to explain why this iteration’s results differ, and to write ‘–prevention-or-next‘ guidance that adds new information rather than repeating existing lessons. ### 2. Read traces (by priority) Before traces are in ‘{before_output_dir}‘. After traces are in ‘{train_after_cycle_dir}‘. See CLAUDE.md’s Iteration Output Structure section for the exact file layout within each output directory. Compare before and after traces to understand what the patch changed in the agent’s behavior. Priority order: 1. Regressed –- always read both before and after traces. You must understand what behavior was correct before and what the patch broke. 2. Still-failing (targeted) –- read to check for partial progress. Did the failure point shift? Is the agent closer to correct behavior? 3. Fixed –- skim the after trace to confirm the patch resolved the root cause as intended, not through a lucky side effect. 4. Still-passing –- skip unless the scenario uses the same tools or components you modified. ### 3. Diagnose state-changed scenarios (MANDATORY) For every regressed AND fixed scenario, run the full ‘diagnose‘ skill to determine whether the state change was truly caused by the patch or is a stochastic artifact (caused by LLM non-determinism). LLM non-determinism means the same agent code can produce different tool-call sequences across runs. This affects both directions: - A regressed scenario (PASS →FAIL) may have nothing to do with the patch –- the agent simply took a different reasoning path. - A fixed scenario (FAIL →PASS) may not be a real fix –- the agent may have succeeded by luck, not because of the patch. Recording this as a true fix pollutes ‘good_patterns‘ with false signal. Accurate causal attribution is critical: false regressions accumulate noise in ‘bad_patterns‘, and false fixes accumulate noise in ‘good_patterns‘. Both degrade the quality of lessons for future iterations. How to distinguish true vs. stochastic state changes: 1. Read the before trace: Identify the exact tool-call sequence and reasoning steps that led to the before result. 2. Read the after trace: Identify where the agent’s behavior diverged. 3. Check the code diff (‘evo-dag show edge {base_parent_idx} {candidate_idx}‘): Does the diff touch any code path, prompt text, hook, or tool that the scenario exercises? If the diff is completely unrelated to the scenario’s tool usage and divergence point, it is likely stochastic. 4. Check the divergence point: Is the behavioral change at a step that the patch modified (true causation) or at an unrelated step where the agent simply made a different LLM-driven choice (stochastic)? Classification criteria: - True (regression or fix): The diff modifies code/prompt/hook that the scenario directly exercises, AND the after trace shows the agent behaving differently at the modified point in a way that explains the outcome change. - Stochastic: The diff does NOT touch anything the scenario exercises, OR the agent’s divergence point is unrelated to the patch (e.g., different search query phrasing, different email wording). - Uncertain: The diff touches a shared component but the causal link is unclear. Record as uncertain with specific evidence. 

38 (continued) 

Do NOT attribute any state change to "LLM non-determinism" or "stochastic noise" without performing the above analysis. Every classification must cite: - The specific divergence point in the traces - Whether the diff touches the relevant code path - The evidence for or against a causal link Record the classification in ‘–explanation‘ and ‘–prevention-or-next‘. For true regressions, explain what the patch broke. For stochastic regressions, note the evidence so future iterations don’t over-correct. For true fixes, explain the causal chain from patch to fix. For stochastic fixes, note the evidence so future iterations don’t over-rely on the patch strategy. ### 4. Inspect code changes Run ‘evo-dag show edge {base_parent_idx} {candidate_idx}‘ to see the code diff, files changed, and per-scenario impacts. Cross-reference the diff with the trace behavior to understand causality. For deeper inspection, read source files directly in the current worktree ‘{worktree_path}‘. ### 5. Record reflections Use ‘evo-dag update-reflection‘ for every scenario in the mini-batch. Fields: - ‘–root-cause‘: The underlying reason the scenario fails (independent of the patch). What is the agent doing wrong and why? - ‘–explanation‘: For ‘fixed‘ –- how the patch resolved it. For ‘still_failing‘ –- why the patch did NOT work (what was insufficient). For ‘regressed‘ –- what the patch broke and how. For ‘still_passing‘ –- why the patch did not interfere (only for scenarios using modified components). - ‘–prevention-or-next‘: What to try next, or what to avoid. This is critical for all non-passing outcomes –- it creates the lessons that future iterations rely on. - ‘–generalization-note‘: How this scenario’s outcome relates to development set accuracy. Did the patch generalize beyond the mini-batch? Record when dev scores are available. Per outcome: ‘fixed‘ –- You MUST have completed the diagnosis step (step 3) before recording this reflection. Classify as true fix or stochastic artifact. “‘bash # True fix (patch caused the success): evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "fixed" \ –root-cause "Agent called X with wrong param Y because docstring said Z." \ –explanation "TRUE FIX: Patch corrected docstring to clarify Y. Agent now calls correctly at step 4 –- directly caused by diff in tools/email.py L42." \ –prevention-or-next "For similar tool-misuse scenarios, check docstring accuracy first." # Stochastic artifact (not caused by the patch): evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "fixed" \ –root-cause "Agent happened to choose correct search query in after trace." \ –explanation "STOCHASTIC: Diff only touches calendar tool. This scenario uses search tool exclusively. Agent succeeded because it picked a better search query by chance at step 2 –- unrelated to patch." \ –prevention-or-next "Not a reliable fix –- scenario may fail again. Root cause (weak search strategy) still needs addressing." “‘ ‘regressed‘ (highest priority) –- You MUST have completed the diagnosis step (step 3) before recording this reflection. Classify as true regression or stochastic artifact with evidence. “‘bash # True regression (patch caused the failure): 

39 (continued) 

evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "regressed" \ –root-cause "This scenario relied on optional param Y in tool X." \ –explanation "TRUE REGRESSION: Docstring change removed note about Y being optional. Agent stopped passing Y. Divergence at step 5 where agent no longer passes Y –- directly caused by diff in tools/email.py L42." \ –prevention-or-next "When modifying docstrings, preserve param optionality annotations." # Stochastic artifact (not caused by the patch): evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "regressed" \ –root-cause "Agent used different search query phrasing in after trace." \ –explanation "STOCHASTIC: Diff only touches calendar tool docstring. This scenario uses email tool exclusively. Agent diverged at step 3 with different query wording –- unrelated to patch." \ –prevention-or-next "No action needed –- stochastic noise. Do not over-correct for this scenario." “‘ ‘still_failing‘ –- Explain why the patch was insufficient. What should the next iteration try instead? “‘bash evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "still_failing" \ –root-cause "Agent uses absolute dates instead of relative dates in messages." \ –explanation "Prompt rule ’use relative dates’ was too weak –- agent still used ’Oct 22’. Partial progress: bullet formatting was fixed." \ –prevention-or-next "Stronger rule needed. Consider PreToolUse hook on send_message for just-in-time reminder." “‘ ‘still_passing‘ –- For scenarios that use the same tools or components you modified, explain which specific patch change could have caused interference and why it didn’t. This is valuable signal for understanding patch safety. “‘bash evo-dag update-reflection \ –node {candidate_idx} \ –scenario "<id>" –status "still_passing" \ –explanation "Uses send_message but passes because it sends user-provided verbatim content. Our rule only affects agent-composed messages." “‘ For scenarios unrelated to the patch, use the batch command: “‘bash evo-dag update-reflection –node {candidate_idx} –batch-still-passing "id1,id2,..." “‘ {generalization_workflow_step} ## Causal Attribution Checklist Before finishing, verify each regressed AND fixed scenario’s reflection: 1. Classified: Explicitly labeled as TRUE (REGRESSION/FIX) or STOCHASTIC 2. Evidence-based: Cites the specific divergence point in traces 3. Diff-linked: States whether the diff touches the relevant code path 4. Actionable: True regressions have prevention guidance; true fixes explain the causal chain; stochastic cases explicitly state the evidence and implications ## Reflection Quality Checklist Before finishing, verify each reflection meets these criteria: 1. Specific: References exact tool calls, steps, or code paths 2. Causal: Explains WHY the outcome occurred, not just WHAT happened 

40 (continued) 

3. Actionable: ‘–prevention-or-next‘ gives clear guidance for future iterations –- not generic advice like "try harder" 4. Distinct: Each reflection adds unique information (no copy-paste templates across scenarios) ## Constraints - Record a reflection for every scenario in the mini-batch. - Use ‘evo-dag update-reflection‘ –- do NOT write reflections to files. - Do NOT modify source code during reflection –- Session 2 is analysis only. - Do NOT read raw traces from development set output directories –- only aggregate dev accuracy is available for generalization analysis. - Do NOT read raw traces from development set dirs (‘_val_‘ or ‘seed_val_‘ output dirs) –- only aggregate accuracy is available. CRITICAL: You MUST run ‘evo-dag update-reflection‘ for every scenario in the mini-batch before finishing this session. Use individual calls for fixed/regressed/still_failing scenarios and ‘–batch-still-passing‘ for unaffected passing scenarios. Missing reflections degrade the quality of accumulated lessons for future iterations. 

Figure 14: Reflection Session Prompt: agent analyzes per-scenario initial vs. re-evaluation outcomes (fixed / regressed / still_failing / still_passing ), distinguishes true causal effects of the patch from stochastic LLM non-determinism, and records structured reflections that feed back into 

evo-dag show history for future iterations. 

Evolution Session Prompt 

## Mandatory Skills You MUST read and follow the SKILL.md for each skill listed below. Do NOT skip or summarize any skill –- execute the full procedure described in each one. These skills are installed at ‘.claude/skills/<n>/SKILL.md‘ in the current worktree. | Order | Skill | When | Why | |–––-|–––-|–––|––-| | 1 | ‘history-analysis‘ | Before any other work (Step 1) | Structured analysis of the full evolution history –- classifies every patch as revert vs. preserve to inform candidate selection | | 2 | ‘patch-verification‘ | After any codebase change (Step 5) | Verifies the prepared base codebase has no runtime errors –- a broken base causes every subsequent session to fail | > Enforcement: If you make any change to the worktree (rsync, cherry-pick, revert, or code edit), you MUST run the ‘patch-verification‘ skill’s full procedure before finishing. Skipping verification is a critical failure. ## Goal Prepare the best possible base codebase for this iteration’s patch. The optimization objective is to maximize performance across the task distribution, with development set (dev) accuracy as the proxy. Your selection must be data-driven, based on dev scores, regression analysis, and cross-candidate code comparison –- not on attachment to accumulated patches. Anti–Sunk-Cost Principle: The number of iterations invested in a lineage is NOT a reason to continue it. A long lineage with declining dev scores is a signal to switch, not to persist. Evaluate each candidate by its measured performance and the quality of its code, not by how many patches led to it. ## Context - Iteration: {iteration} - Phase: {phase} - Current worktree: ‘{worktree_path}‘ (fork of C{base_parent_idx}) - Base parent: C{base_parent_idx} (worktree: ‘{parent_worktree}‘) ## Candidate Performance (sorted by dev score) {candidate_table} Note: Dev scores are only available for candidates that passed mini-batch acceptance. "pending" means the candidate was not evaluated on the dev set. Use patch history, raw traces, and codebase inspection to assess these. 

41 (continued) 

## DAG Topology {dag_topology} ## Selection Strategy Choose the base candidate by weighing dev scores, regression history, score trajectory, and code quality together. Dev scores are noisy –- small differences may be evaluation variance, so corroborate with regression counts and code inspection. Do not stay on a lineage just because many patches were accumulated; patches only have value if performance improved. Options: - Continue from latest: When the lineage is near its peak and stable. Revert any regressions and cherry-pick fixes from other candidates. - Switch parent: When dev score has dropped well below the best candidate and the trajectory is not recovering. Cherry-pick verified good patches from the old lineage. - Combine candidates: When different candidates have complementary strengths in non-overlapping areas. Key rules: - Regressions identified here must be reverted in THIS session. Do NOT defer to Session 1 –- Session 1 only addresses the current mini-batch and will not fix prior regressions. - When cherry-picking, prefer diff-level precision over copying entire files. Use ‘evo-dag show edge‘ to see exact diffs and apply only the relevant changes. Whole-file copies via rsync bring unintended changes. - Compare top candidates’ codebases directly (‘diff -rq‘) to find cherry-pick opportunities that aren’t visible from scores alone. ## Workflow ### 1. Analyze history MANDATORY first step. Run the ‘history-analysis‘ skill to build a structured understanding of the full evolution history. Do NOT skip this step or truncate ‘evo-dag show history‘ with ‘head‘/‘tail‘. The skill provides the methodology for reading the complete history without truncation. The purpose of this analysis is to classify every patch in the history into two categories that directly inform candidate selection: #### Patches to revert (caused severe regressions) - Which patches introduced regressions? Identify the exact iteration, candidate, and code diff that caused each regression. - How severe is each regression? (How many scenarios regressed? Did dev score drop?) - Is the regression still present in the current lineage, or was it already fixed by a later patch? - What files were modified –- so you know exactly what to revert or undo. #### Patches to preserve (drove performance gains) - Which patches produced the largest improvements in dev score? - Which patches fixed scenarios that stayed fixed in subsequent iterations (durable fixes vs. fragile ones)? - Which patches generalized well beyond their target mini-batch? - What files and patterns were involved –- so you know what to protect when combining candidates. This classification directly drives your selection decision: - Continue from latest: Revert the harmful diffs while keeping the beneficial ones. - Switch parent: If too many regressions have accumulated, switch to the best candidate and cherry-pick the preserved patches. - Combine candidates: If different candidates have complementary preserved patches, combine them. ### 2. Investigate candidates Use the following sources to decide which candidate(s) to build on: 1. History analysis output: The structured summary from Step 1 –- lineage trajectory, lessons, and cross-candidate strengths. 2. Specific candidate: ‘evo-dag show node <idx>‘ –- scores, patch intent, verdict, output directories. 3. Raw traces: Read evaluation output and trace files in the iteration output directories listed by ‘evo-dag show node‘ or ‘evo-dag show current-batch‘. See CLAUDE.md’s Iteration Output Structure section for the file layout. 

42 (continued) 

4. Candidate codebases: Read source files directly in other candidates’ worktrees to understand what changed and whether a fix is worth porting. Worktree paths are shown in the candidate table and ‘evo-dag show node‘. 5. Cross-candidate code comparison (MANDATORY for top candidates): For the top 2-3 candidates by dev score, directly compare their codebases to identify divergent files and cherry-pick opportunities: “‘bash diff -rq {session_root}/worktrees/<candidate_A_dir>/ {session_root}/worktrees/<candidate_B_dir>/ | grep -v ’.git’ “‘ Then read the divergent files in both worktrees to understand which candidate’s version is better for each file. This comparison reveals cherry-pick opportunities that are invisible from score data alone. ### 3. Revert regressions (MANDATORY if continuing from latest) If you chose to continue from the latest candidate, you MUST revert all identified regressions in THIS session. Do NOT defer regression fixes to Session 1 –- Session 1 only addresses the current mini-batch and will not fix prior regressions. For each regression identified in Step 1: 1. Locate the exact diff that caused the regression using ‘evo-dag show edge <parent> <child>‘ for the iteration that introduced it. 2. Compare with pre-regression code: Read the same file in the pre-regression candidate’s worktree to see what the code looked like before the harmful change. 3. Revert only the harmful lines: Do not revert the entire patch if it also contains beneficial changes. Surgically revert only the lines that caused the regression. 4. Preserve beneficial changes: If a patch contains both good and bad changes, keep the good parts. Check whether specific scenarios were fixed by specific lines in the diff to determine what to preserve. After reverting, run the ‘patch-verification‘ skill to ensure no runtime errors were introduced. ### 4. Prepare the base codebase Each candidate has a base parent (the candidate it was forked from) and optionally cherry-pick parents (other candidates whose code was referenced, copied, or combined). The base parent is set automatically by the outer loop. Cherry-pick parents are what you record here. Your worktree starts as a fork of C{base_parent_idx} (base parent). #### Switching base entirely If you decided to switch base, copy the new base’s entire codebase: “‘bash rsync -a –exclude=’.git’ {session_root}/worktrees/<candidate_dir>/ ./ “‘ Then cherry-pick good patches from the old lineage using the diff-level method below. #### Diff-level cherry-pick (preferred over file-level copy) When porting specific fixes from another candidate, use diff-level precision rather than copying entire files. Copying entire files brings unintended changes from the source candidate. 1. Identify the exact diff: Use ‘evo-dag show edge <parent> <child>‘ to see the exact code changes that constituted the fix you want to port. 2. Compare files: Read the specific file in both the source candidate’s worktree and your current worktree. Use ‘diff‘ to see differences: “‘bash diff {session_root}/worktrees/<source_candidate_dir>/<file> ./<file> “‘ 3. Apply only the relevant changes: Manually apply only the lines from the diff that correspond to the fix. Do not copy unrelated changes that the source candidate may have accumulated. 4. Verify: After each cherry-pick, run the ‘patch-verification‘ skill. ### 5. Verify changes If you made any changes to the worktree (rsync, cherry-pick, revert, etc.), you MUST run the ‘patch-verification‘ skill to ensure the codebase has no runtime errors. A broken base codebase will cause every subsequent session to fail –- verification is mandatory. 

43 (continued)   

> ### 6. Record selection After preparing the base code, record your selection with ‘evo-dag update-selection‘. List all candidates you referenced –- whether you switched base entirely, cherry-picked specific files, or just used their code as reference for a re-implementation: “‘bash evo-dag update-selection \ –parent-candidates "<idx1>,<idx2>,..." \ –reasoning "<what you took from each and why>" “‘ CRITICAL: You MUST run ‘evo-dag update-selection‘ before finishing this session. Failure to do so will result in lost selection history that future iterations need to understand the DAG lineage. ## What Happens Next After this session, the outer loop runs Session 1 (Diagnose + Patch): the agent receives the current mini-batch’s failing scenarios with execution traces, diagnoses root causes, and applies targeted code patches to the worktree you prepared here.

Figure 15: Evolution Session Prompt: data-driven base codebase selection from prior candidates, including history analysis, regression reversion, and diff-level cherry-picking. 

## Q Data Licenses 

The licenses for the datasets used in this paper are as follows: • GAIA2: cc-by-4.0 • SWE-Bench Pro: MIT license • Terminal-Bench 2.0: Apache-2.0 license All datasets were used strictly for research purposes and were not utilized in any non-research contexts, particularly for commercial applications. 

## R Limitations and Future Work 

AutoSaddler currently formulates harness optimization as a supervised learning problem, assuming access to a training set of tasks paired with gold answers and a task-level success metric (e.g., pass/fail) that provides a clear signal for each rollout. While this assumption aligns with standard agent benchmarks, real-world deployment settings may lack such ground-truth outcomes, and obtaining them at scale can be prohibitively expensive. A natural extension is therefore to relax this supervision requirement and study unsupervised or weakly supervised harness optimization, in which failure signals are derived from intrinsic cues such as trace-level inconsistencies, tool-call errors, or self-consistency across rollouts rather than external labels. Another direction is to synthesize training data by bootstrapping from agent environments, such as each user’s Universe in GAIA2. Finally, our current scope is limited to stateless, independent tasks; extending AutoSaddler to stateful settings, integrating memory and skill curation, and validating the approach across a broader set of LLM families remain important directions for future work. In terms of real-world deployment, we want to stress the importance of strong governance and human-in-the-loop in the early development stage, namely, automated harness modifications should undergo human review or additional security validation before deployment to production systems. 44