Title: KernelOPT: Dispatch-Aware Agentic Search for GPU Kernel Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.30059v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 01:30:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# KERNEL OPT: D ISPATCH -A WARE AGENTIC SEARCH FOR GPU K ERNEL OPTIMIZATION 

Aheli Poddar *†‡ 

Red Hat 

ahpoddar@redhat.com 

Sanskar Prasad *‡ 

Red Hat 

sanspras@redhat.com 

Arindam Samanta ‡

Red Hat 

arsamant@redhat.com 

Subha Chakraborty ‡

Red Hat 

subhchak@redhat.com 

Vishal Goyal 

Red Hat 

visgoyal@redhat.com 

Rohit Singh Rathaur 

Red Hat 

rrathaur@redhat.com 

## ABSTRACT 

Deep learning inference and training performance depends critically on GPU ker-nel efficiency. Modern compilers such as PyTorch Inductor automatically generate GPU kernels from high-level model code, but frequently underperform expert-written implementations by wide margins. Recent LLM-assisted kernel optimiz-ers can close this gap for standalone kernels, yet treat compiled models as black boxes, generally optimizing individual standalone kernels without respecting the compiler’s structural decisions or verifying the model end-to-end. We present KernelOPT, a multi-agent system that treats compiled models as structured arti-facts. It preserves vendor library calls (cuBLAS, cuDNN) and exclusively targets generated Triton sub-kernels using five profiling-guided LLM agents. A four-gate verification cascade of static validation, multi-seed correctness, model-level float64-fallback verification, and performance gating filters candidates during op-timization and verifies the re-stitched model end-to-end. If no candidate passes all four gates, the system preserves the compiler baseline. The system accepts Py-Torch nn.Module s, standalone Triton kernels, and Helion kernels. Evaluated on 250 KernelBench problems, KernelOPT achieves geometric mean speedups over 

torch.compile of 1.40 × (Level 1: 51/100), 1.15 × (Level 2: 31/100), and 1.07 × (Level 3: 12/50) across all problems. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Efficient GPU kernels are the foundation of performant deep learning. PyTorch Inductor (Ansel et al., 2024), the default torch.compile backend, delivers a 2.27 × geometric mean inference speedup over eager mode by lowering operations to Triton (Tillet et al., 2019). However, the gen-erated code leaves substantial performance on the table. Inductor’s autotuning explores a limited tile-size configuration space by default, its fusion heuristics are conservative, and its cross-operation rewrites are limited to a fixed set of manually specified pattern matches rather than a general al-gebraic simplification framework. Expert-written kernels such as FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2024) demonstrate that near-order-of-magnitude speedups are achievable on the same hard-ware, but require extensive engineering effort; for example, FlashAttention-3 (Shah et al., 2024) for the H100 took roughly two years to reach 85% peak throughput (Zhang et al., 2026). Recent work has applied LLM agents to automate this process. KernelAgent (Wang et al., 2025) translates PyTorch models to Triton kernels via multi-agent code-to-code generation with NCU-guided optimization. AccelOpt (Zhang et al., 2026) introduces an iterative planner–executor– summarizer agent loop with optimization memory for NKI kernels on AWS Trainium. K-Search (Cao et al., 2026) formulates kernel generation as planning over a co-evolving LLM world 

> ∗

Equal contribution (joint first authors). 

> †

Corresponding author. 

> ‡

The first four authors completed this work during an internship with the PyTorch team at Red Hat. 

1arXiv:2609.30059v1 [cs.DC] 24 Sep 2026 model with tree-structured search. These systems share a critical limitation: while some support multi-kernel decomposition, none provides end-to-end verification of the re-stitched model against the original PyTorch model with weight-extracted correctness and performance gating. A key observation motivates our approach: compiler-generated code has structure that LLM-driven optimization should respect. A compiled PyTorch model is not a single kernel; rather, it is a struc-tured artifact where the compiler has already made dispatch decisions: cuBLAS (NVIDIA Corpo-ration, 2024a) for GEMM, cuDNN (Chetlur et al., 2014) for convolution, and Triton for pointwise and reduction operations. The compiler’s dispatch decisions are typically sound; what is subopti-mal is the quality of the remaining Triton code. KernelOPT exploits this structure: it respects the compiler’s library dispatch, focuses LLM effort on the Triton-generated sub-kernels, and verifies the result at the model level. This formulation yields three core contributions: (1) Compiled-model kernel optimization: We decompose, selectively optimize, and verify entire compiled models, respecting compiler dispatch rather than overriding it (accepting PyTorch nn.Module s, Triton, and Helion (Ansel et al., 2025) kernels). (2) Four-gate verification cascade: A rigorous sequential filter applying static validation, multi-seed correctness, model-level precision-aware error ratio ρ, and performance gating (§4.4). 

(3) Profiling-guided multi-agent search: Five agents (four LLM-driven, one deterministic) in a LangGraph (LangChain Inc., 2024) system using NCU (NVIDIA Corporation, 2024b) profiling to classify bottlenecks and guide optimization. Unlike one-shot approaches, the executor agent receives compile errors and correctness failures as in-conversation feedback, enabling iterative self-correction. A meltdown detector prevents search stagnation when optimization directions collapse. The complete codebase is available at https://github.com/TorchedHat/KernelOPT .

## 2 RELATED WORK 

Compiler-based and manual optimization. Halide (Ragan-Kelley et al., 2013) and TVM with Ansor (Chen et al., 2018; Zheng et al., 2020) separate algorithm from schedule to enable large search spaces. Triton uses block-level programming with automatic compiler scheduling; PyTorch Induc-tor (Ansel et al., 2024) integrates Triton codegen into torch.compile but constrains autotuning to fixed tile sizes and fusion patterns. ThunderKittens (Spector et al., 2024) provides tile-level CUDA abstractions for hand-writing high-performance attention and SSM kernels. Mirage (Wu et al., 2025) applies multi-level superoptimization with formal equivalence verification, represent-ing the state of the art in non-LLM kernel synthesis. 

LLM-driven kernel optimization. KernelAgent (Wang et al., 2025) combines multi-agent gen-eration with NCU profiling for Triton kernels on NVIDIA GPUs. AccelOpt (Zhang et al., 2026) introduces the iterative planner–executor–summarizer architecture with beam search and optimiza-tion memory for NKI kernels on AWS Trainium; we adapt this iterative framework to NVIDIA GPUs and extend it with Inductor-aware synthesis, model-level verification, and shipped guidelines. CudaForge (Zhang et al., 2025) uses a two-agent Judge–Coder system. K-Search (Cao et al., 2026) uses LLM-guided tree search with a co-evolving world model. Astra (Wei et al., 2025) employs a multi-agent architecture with iterative profiling for CUDA kernel optimization but targets exist-ing production kernels rather than compiled-model synthesis. OptiML (Bhattacharjee et al., 2026) combines program synthesis with MCTS-guided refinement for CUDA kernels. AutoKernel (Jaber & Jaber, 2026) applies an iterative keep/revert loop with model-level profiling and a five-stage cor-rectness harness. Among these, only AutoKernel provides model-level profiling and end-to-end correctness verification; however, it does not use NCU hardware profiling to guide optimization di-rections. KernelOPT is the first system to combine Inductor-aware compiled-model optimization, NCU-guided planning, and end-to-end model-level verification with a compiler-baseline fallback. 

Benchmarks. KernelBench (Ouyang et al., 2025) provides 250 problems across three difficulty levels with standardized evaluation using torch.allclose(rtol= 10 −4, atol= 10 −4). We evaluate on all 250 problems plus 20 tutorial kernels. 23 PROBLEM FORMULATION 

Definition 1 (Kernel Optimization) Let M0 = ⟨{ k1, . . . , k m}, L ⟩ denote a compiled model pro-duced by torch.compile , where {ki} are Triton-generated sub-kernels and L are extern library calls (cuBLAS, cuDNN) that remain fixed. Let K be the space of syntactically valid Triton pro-grams, τ (k) the wall-clock sub-kernel time via do bench , M (ki → k′

> i

) the re-stitching operator that substitutes k′ 

> i

into the model, and V(k, k 0) a verification function. The optimization problem is: 

k∗ = arg min  

> k∈K

τ (k) subject to V(k, k 0) = 1 (1) The search space K is intractable to enumerate. We access it through an LLM-based transformation operator Aθ : K × P → K , parameterized by an LLM θ, that takes a kernel k and an optimization plan p ∈ P (derived from NCU profiling) and produces a candidate k′ = Aθ (k, p ).

Four-gate verification. The verification function V(k, k 0) is the conjunction of four gates applied sequentially: 

V(k, k 0) = Vstat (k) ∧ Vcorr (k, k 0)

| {z }

> per-candidate (Gates 1–2)

∧ Vmodel (k, k 0) ∧ Vperf (k, k 0)

| {z }

> end-to-end (Gates 3–4)

(2) where Vstat validates structural properties, Vcorr verifies numerical equivalence with 

allclose (ϵr =10 −3, ϵ a=10 −3) (§4.4), Vmodel verifies full-model correctness with weight-extracted inputs and stricter tolerance ( ϵr =ϵa=10 −4) plus a float64 fallback (§4.4), and Vperf 

verifies that τM (k0 → k) ≤ γ · τM (k0) with noise margin γ = 1 .03 . Gates 1–2 run on every candidate during optimization; Gates 3–4 run once on the re-stitched model after optimization completes. When V(k∗, k 0) = 0 for all candidates, the system returns k0 unchanged. 

## 4 METHOD 

4.1 SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

KernelOPT operates in two modes. In single-kernel mode, it optimizes a standalone Triton or He-lion (Ansel et al., 2025) kernel directly. In multi-kernel mode, it processes a PyTorch model through five stages: (1) Inductor-aware synthesis, where torch.compile traces the model, extern kernels (cuBLAS (NVIDIA Corporation, 2024a)/cuDNN (Chetlur et al., 2014)) are detected and preserved, fusible groups are merged, and an LLM generates validated standalone Triton kernels; (2) baseline profiling with NVIDIA Nsight Compute (NVIDIA Corporation, 2024b) ( --set full kernel re-play); (3) strategy analysis classifying the NCU bottleneck tier; (4) iterative optimization with T

iterations of plan generation, execution, profiling, and beam selection; and (5) re-stitch and verifica-tion, replacing each optimized sub-kernel in the full model with four-gate verification (Eq. 2). 

Inductor-aware synthesis. When processing a PyTorch model, torch.compile with 

max autotune generates Inductor output containing a mix of async compile.triton 

blocks and extern kernels calls. KernelOPT detects these library calls via regex over the In-ductor output and flags them as needs triton replacement: False . Adjacent fusible kernel groups are merged, and the LLM generates a standalone Triton kernel for each group from its aten operation graph (e.g., linear →mul →hardtanh →gelu fused into a single ker-nel). Each generated kernel is validated against the original PyTorch model in eager mode using 

allclose(rtol= 10 −4, atol= 10 −4) with 2 seeds; failures are fed back to the LLM for up to K retry attempts. Only kernels that pass this synthesis-stage validation enter the iterative opti-mization pipeline. This step can itself yield large speedups by fusing operations that Inductor kept separate (e.g., 33 × on L2 kernel 018). 4.2 AGENT ARCHITECTURE 

Following AccelOpt’s planner–executor–summarizer architecture (Zhang et al., 2026), five agents collaborate within a LangGraph (LangChain Inc., 2024) state machine; we extend the loop with a 3Figure 1: KernelOPT pipeline. A PyTorch model is traced via Inductor; sub-kernels are classified as Triton-generated (optimizable) or extern-library (preserved). Five agents iterate within a LangGraph state machine using NCU profiling feedback. Optimized kernels are re-stitched and verified at the model level. profiler agent and a strategy analyst for NCU-guided planning. The profiler configures NCU pro-filing ( ncu --set full ) by analyzing kernel source for framework markers ( @triton.jit ,

@helion.kernel , async compile ). The profiler parses the full NCU CSV report and builds a structured profiling context containing Speed-of-Light (SOL) throughput, duration, registers, oc-cupancy, and NCU rules. The top-3 NCU rules ranked by estimated speedup percentage are injected into the planner’s prompt alongside the bottleneck classification. The strategy analyst deterministically classifies the NCU bottleneck tier: near-optimal (either SOL 

> 80% ), memory-bound (SOL mem > SOL comp , both ≤ 80% ), compute-bound (vice versa), or underutilized (both equal and ≤ 80% ); for multi-kernel inputs it additionally makes an LLM call to decide fuse-vs-optimize grouping. The planner generates N optimization plans per iteration, with a meltdown detector that triggers diversity enforcement when recent directions (up to the last six) collapse to ≤ 2 unique approaches, identified by normalized string matching. The executor 

implements each plan with up to K retry attempts, receiving compile errors and correctness failures as feedback within the same conversation. The summarizer distills each attempt into a structured experience item. 4.3 PROFILING -G UIDED BEAM SEARCH 

Prior systems use beam search (Zhang et al., 2026) or repeated sampling (Wang et al., 2025) for candidate selection, but without profiling-guided diversity enforcement. The transformation land-scape is non-convex: a locally suboptimal transformation may enable subsequent improvements unreachable by fixed-direction search. We formulate the optimization as search over a rooted tree G = ( V, E ), where each node v ∈ V

represents a kernel kv ∈ K with latency τ (kv ), and each edge (u, v ) represents a transforma-tion kv = Aθ (ku, p ). Beam selection uses UCB( c=1 .4) to balance exploration of underexpanded branches against exploitation of the best-latency path. 4Algorithm 1 Profiling-Guided Beam Search 

Require: Baseline k0, beam width B, iterations T , plans N , retries K, LLM θ, memory M

Ensure: Optimized kernel k∗

1: π0 ← Profiler (k0) {NCU parse }

2: b0 ← Analyst (π0) {bottleneck tier }

3: B0 ← { (k0, τ (k0), π 0, b 0, []) }

4: for t = 1 to T do 

5: Ct ← ∅ 

6: for (ki, τ i, π i, b i, h i) ∈ B t−1 do 

7: {p1, . . . , p ⌈N/B ⌉} ← Planner θ (πi, b i, k i, M, h i)

8: for j = 1 to ⌈N/B ⌉ do 

9: k′ ← Executor θ (ki, p j , K )

10: M ← Summarizer θ (ki, k ′, p j , M)

11: if Vstat (k′) ∧ Vcorr (k′, k 0) then 

12: π′ ← Profiler (k′); b′ ← Analyst (π′) {Gates 1–2 passed }

13: Ct ← C t ∪ { (k′, τ (k′), π ′, b ′, h i ∪ { pj })}

14: end if 

15: end for 

16: end for 

17: Bt ← DiverseSelect (Ct, B )

18: if no improvement for 2 consecutive iterations then 

19: break 

20: end if 

21: end for 

22: k∗ ← arg min (k,τ, ·,·,·)∈S  

> tBt

τ

23: return k∗ if V(k∗, k 0) = 1 (Def. 3), else k0

The diversity-aware selection (Algorithm 1, line 17) partitions the candidate set C by chain origin Ci

and proceeds in two phases: DiverseSelect (C, B ) = {arg min 

> c∈C i

τ (c)}i∈chains 

| {z }

> best per chain

∪ top-(B − | chains |)

| {z }

> global best

(3) Phase 1 ensures each chain contributes its best candidate (exploration); Phase 2 fills remaining beam slots by global latency (exploitation). 4.4 VERIFICATION CASCADE 

The four gates are applied sequentially: Gates 1–2 filter every candidate during optimization; Gates 3–4 verify the re-stitched model end-to-end. 

Gates 1 & 2: Static Validation and Multi-Seed Correctness. Dry-run execution catches syntax errors and runtime crashes before numerical comparison. Candidates then undergo evaluation across three random seeds via allclose (ϵr =ϵa=10 −3) against the original PyTorch Model executed in eager mode. For fused sub-kernels, the LLM-generated kernel function and get inputs 

produce the isolated block’s inputs; when Inductor externalizes weights, the validator extracts real model parameters via shape/dtype matching rather than using random values. Failures are rejected immediately and the error is fed back to the executor for retry. 

Gate 3: Model-level correctness ( Vmodel ). After optimization, the re-stitched model undergoes tiered end-to-end verification with stricter tolerances ( ϵr =ϵa=10 −4). When strict comparison fails (common for kernels using TF32 tensor core paths), a float64 reference disambiguates. Let of 32 

denote the optimized kernel’s FP32 output, rf 32 the baseline kernel’s FP32 output, and rf 64 the baseline kernel’s FP64 output (high-precision reference). Let dref = ∥rf 32 − rf 64 ∥∞ and dopt =

∥of 32 − rf 64 ∥∞. When dref ≥ 10 −8 (the baseline itself has FP32 rounding error), the error ratio is: 

ρ = dopt / d ref . (4) 5If ρ ≤ 10 , the error is within the range expected from different FP32 accumulation orders; correct TF32 kernels yield ρ ∈ [1 , 3] while algorithmically incorrect kernels yield ρ > 100 . When dref <

10 −8 (exact operations such as max or argmax ), the system falls back to a scale-relative check: 

dopt / max( ∥rf 32 ∥∞, 10 −12 ) ≤ 10 −4. An absolute bound dopt ≤ max(5 ×10 −3, 10 −3 · ∥ rf 32 ∥∞)

handles fused kernels where Inductor’s separate-operation approach anchors precision artificially. When Inductor externalizes model parameters as explicit function arguments, the optimized kernel’s input generator produces random values for weights, yielding meaningless outputs. We intercept In-ductor’s argument flattening via torch.compile (m, backend = fcapture ), where fcapture records the exact flat argument list in Inductor’s order with real model state. Data inputs are identified by shape/dtype matching and replaced with seed-consistent values; model state arguments are pre-served. 

Gate 4: Performance gate ( Vperf ). Let τM (ki → k′) denote the wall-clock time of the re-stitched model M (ki → k′):

Vperf (k, k 0) = ⊮[τM (k0 → k) ≤ γ · τM (k0)] , γ =1 .03 . (5) This catches optimizations where per-kernel speedup does not translate to model-level improve-ment; for example, when a Triton matmul with manual transpose strides forces downstream opera-tions to insert implicit .contiguous() copies. Subprocess-isolated do bench (warmup=25 ms, rep=100 ms) prevents CUDA state leaks between measurements. When the gate rejects, the error is fed back for a targeted retry (up to 2 attempts); if all retries fail, the compiler baseline is preserved. 4.5 EXPERIENCE MEMORY 

Following AccelOpt (Zhang et al., 2026), KernelOPT maintains a bounded FIFO queue of capacity 

Q storing experience items curated by asymmetric speedup thresholds: store (e) = ⊮[s(e) ≥ s+] ∨ ⊮[s(e)−1 ≥ s−] , (6) where s(e) is the speedup and s+ = 1 .05 , s− = 1 .20 . The asymmetry reflects that marginal improvements ( <5%) are less informative than significant regressions ( >20%). We extend this with two components. First, a cross-run strategy tracker that maintains per-kernel-type success rates; strategies with <30% success after ≥3 attempts are flagged as AVOID. Second, 

benchmark-derived guidelines extracted post-hoc from the completed 250 KernelBench runs ship as cold-start context for new targets (extracted three weeks after evaluation; they do not affect the results in Table 1). These serve as planner context, not hard constraints. 

## 5 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

All experiments run on a single NVIDIA H200 GPU (Hopper, CC 9.0, 132 SMs, 141 GB HBM3, 4.8 TB/s bandwidth) using Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic) accessed via Google Cloud Vertex AI. 1

The hyperparameters are fixed across all 250 problems with no per-level tuning: T =5 iterations, 

N =4 plans per iteration, K=4 executor retries, beam width B=4 , performance gate margin γ=1 .03 ,memory queue capacity Q=8 with asymmetric thresholds s+=1 .05 , s−=1 .20 , and error ratio bound 

ρmax =10 . NCU profiling ( ncu --set full , kernel replay) extracts SOL throughput, duration, registers, shared memory, occupancy, and all NCU rules ranked by estimated speedup; the top-3 rules are injected into the planner prompt. Per-call LLM timeout is 900 s. 

Baseline selection. Following the evaluation protocol of KernelBench (Ouyang et al., 2025), we use torch.compile (Inductor with max autotune ) as the primary baseline, isolating the marginal gain over the state-of-the-art deterministic compiler. We omit direct quantitative com-parisons with other tools for two reasons. First, hardware sensitivity: our experiments run on an NVIDIA H200, whereas prior metrics are tied to H100 or AWS Trainium (Zhang et al., 2026) en-vironments, rendering direct metric transfer invalid. Second, architectural mismatch: prior systems  

> 1API: https://cloud.google.com/products/model-garden/claude . KernelOPT’s LLM backend is pluggable and accepts any OpenAI-compatible endpoint ( https://developers.openai. com/api/reference ).

6A. Summary B. Speedup distribution (94 opt.)                                                                          

> Level Total Opt. M.(opt) M.(s.f.) Fall. Geo. Max Range L1 L2 L3 Tot. L1 100 51 20 13 16 1.40 ×88.63 ×≥10 ×4105L2 100 31 35 034 1.15 ×33.11 ×[5 ,10) 64010 L3 50 12 3035 1.07 ×4.12 ×[2 ,5) 7029
> [1 .5,2) 2215
> [1 .1,1.5) 88420 All 250 94 58 13 85 1.23 ×88.63 ×[1 .01 ,1.1) 24 16 545

C. Dominant operation (94 optimized) D. Fallback root causes (85 fallbacks) 

Operation L1 L2 L3 Tot. Root cause L1 L2 L3 Tot. Matmul / Linear 14 9 7 30 GEMM-dominant (cuBLAS) 0 28 9 37 Conv / ConvTranspose 11 22 1 34 Conv-dominant (cuDNN) 0 6 18 24 Reduction / Scan 4 0 3 7 Perf. gate rejection 15 0 0 15 Norm / Pool / Other 22 0 1 23 No Triton kernels (LSTM/GRU) 0 0 7 7E2E correctness failure 1 0 1 2Total 51 31 12 94 Total 16 34 35 85 

Table 1: Comprehensive KernelBench results vs. torch.compile . Panel A : Level summary where Match (opt) produced correct output at ∼1.0× and Match (synth. fail) indicates LLM syn-thesis failure. Panel B : Speedup distribution. Panel C : Dominant operation breakdown. Panel D :Fallback root causes (cuBLAS/cuDNN dominance accounts for 72%). optimize isolated kernels, whereas KernelOPT operates on the full compiled nn.Module , measur-ing dispatch overhead from re-stitching Triton kernels alongside preserved vendor libraries. We evaluate on the full KernelBench benchmark (Ouyang et al., 2025): Level 1 (100 single-op kernels), Level 2 (100 composite operators), and Level 3 (50 model architectures), plus 10 Tri-ton and 10 Helion tutorial kernels (270 total problems). Performance is measured via do bench 

(warmup=25 ms, rep=100 ms); per-candidate correctness uses the relaxed allclose( 10 −3) tol-erance to avoid rejecting valid TF32 candidates during search, and the final end-to-end verification tightens to the KernelBench-standard 10 −4. The total compute budget is ∼1,100 GPU-hours on H200 (L1: ∼145 h on 1 GPU; L2: ∼210 h on 2 GPUs; L3: ∼730 h on up to 8 GPUs in parallel, with individual models ranging from 6 min to 66 h). 

## 6 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

6.1 MAIN RESULTS 

Table 1 presents a comprehensive breakdown of all 250 KernelBench results. Each kernel is classi-fied into one of four outcome categories: • Optimized (94): the pipeline produces a kernel that passes all four verification gates and is faster than torch.compile ; this kernel replaces the baseline. • Matched (optimized) (58): a correct kernel whose E2E speedup is within measurement noise ( 0.97 –1.01 ×); it replaces the baseline and contributes its measured speedup to the geometric mean. • Matched (synthesis failed) (13): the LLM cannot synthesize a valid Triton kernel ( K=4 

attempts all fail), so the system returns the Inductor AOT baseline (which matches the compiler baseline). • Fallback (85): rejected by the verification cascade; Panel D classifies by root cause: library dominance (61), dispatch overhead (15), no Triton kernels (7), and E2E correctness (2). 7Speedup analysis. The 13 L1 synthesis failures all involve 3D or transposed convolutions whose scatter-gather indexing is difficult for the LLM to express in Triton; the system returns the Inductor baseline. The speedup distribution is heavy-tailed (Panel B): 15 kernels achieve ≥5× and another 

9 achieve 2–5×, while 70 achieve 1.01 –2×. Table 7 (Appendix E) illustrates how NCU bottleneck metrics (compute, memory, occupancy) drive the planner’s strategy selection across all three levels. The largest gains arise from two mechanisms. 

Algorithmic optimization. The top five speedups all involve structural rewrites: L1 012 (diagonal matmul, O(N 3) → O(N 2) row-scaling, 88.63 ×), L1 015 (lower-triangular matmul, skip-zero iter-ation, 20.26 ×), L1 014 (upper-triangular solve, 14.04 ×), L1 085 (batched diagonal, 11.38 ×), and L1 017 (symmetric matmul, 8.65 ×). 

Operator fusion. On L2 018, Inductor-aware synthesis fuses five operations into one kernel (33.11 ×). On L2 064, four fused pointwise operations on a (256 , 4096) tensor eliminate inter-mediate memory round-trips (8.30 ×). L2 022 achieves 7.18 × via similar epilogue fusion. 

Tutorial kernels. Beyond KernelBench, KernelOPT optimizes expert-written tutorial kernels that represent well-tuned starting points. On 10 official Triton tutorials, 4 improve (best: 1.70 × on matrix multiplication via TF32 tensor core configurations). On 10 Helion tutorials, 5 improve (best: 1.08 × on conv2d via tiling adjustments). 6.2 FALLBACK ANALYSIS 

Panel D of Table 1 classifies all 85 fallback kernels by root cause, determined by analyzing each kernel’s full optimization log. The dominant cause is library dominance : 61 of 85 fallbacks (72%) occur because the model is dominated by cuBLAS GEMM or cuDNN convolution calls, for which vendor libraries already operate near peak throughput on the H200. Inductor-aware synthesis cor-rectly identifies these cases (via extern kernels detection) and avoids expending LLM budget on them. 

Library dominance (61 fallbacks). In 37 GEMM-dominant cases (28 L2, 9 L3), cuBLAS mat-muls consume the majority of execution time, leaving only thin Triton epilogues ( <1% of wall time); optimizing the epilogue yields a slower E2E model due to dispatch overhead, caught by the perfor-mance gate. In 24 Conv-dominant cases (6 L2, 18 L3), cuDNN convolution similarly dominates (VGG, ResNet, EfficientNet, MobileNet). Additionally, seven L3 models ( nn.LSTM /nn.GRU )produce zero Triton kernels; KernelOPT detects this and returns the baseline. 

Performance gate effectiveness. The 15 L1 perf-gate rejections demonstrate the necessity of model-level performance verification. The pipeline produces correct per-kernel optimizations (up to 5.84 × per-kernel NCU improvement on kernel 049), but the E2E model is marginally slower due to Triton dispatch overhead versus Inductor’s fused path. Without Gate 4, these would be reported as improvements; however, the gate converts them to compile-baseline fallbacks. 6.3 L3 A RCHITECTURE ANALYSIS 

Level 3 comprises 50 full model architectures ranging from 3-layer MLPs to 259-kernel LLaMA variants. Table 10 (Appendix F) shows results by architecture family: KernelOPT succeeds when optimizable Triton kernels constitute a meaningful fraction of execution time (MLPs, attention epi-logues, U-Net skip connections). 6.4 ABLATION STUDY 

To evaluate individual component contributions, we perform an ablation study over six configura-tions, each disabling exactly one component while holding all other hyperparameters fixed ( T =5 ,

N =4 , K=4 , B=4 ). Running all 250 kernels across 6 configurations would require ∼5,000 ad-ditional GPU-hours; we instead sample 50 problems ( 20 L1, 20 L2, 10 L3) via weighted random sampling that preserves the outcome-category distribution within each level (the problem list is in the supplementary material). All differences between the full system and each ablated configuration are statistically significant (Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.05 ; all five n=50 comparisons have p < 0.01 ). 8Config Opt Match Fall Opt% Full system 19 14 17 38% No beam ( B=1 ) 5 3 41 10% No NCU profiling 5 4 41 10% No memory 4 3 43 8% No multi-iter ( T =1 ) 4 4 42 8% No perf gate 3 3 44 6% No inductor-aware 0 0 20 0% 

Table 2: Ablation study on 50 weighted-random-sampled problems ( n=50 ; “No inductor-aware” runs on L2 only, n=20 ). Removing any single component reduces optimization success by 74–84%. Disabling Inductor-aware synthesis eliminates all L2 optimization. A per-architecture breakdown of the L3 results is provided in Table 10 (Appendix F). Table 2 shows that removing any single component drops the optimization success rate from 38% to ≤10%: beam search and NCU profiling each account for 74% of optimizations ( 19 → 5) and the performance gate for 84% ( 19 → 3), confirming that multi-chain exploration and bottleneck-guided planning are synergistic. Inductor-aware synthesis is the most critical—without it the LLM wastes attempts replacing highly-optimized cuBLAS/cuDNN calls, yielding zero L2 optimizations. These ablations demonstrate that applying a frontier LLM naively to a compiled model produces pervasive regressions; the efficacy of KernelOPT therefore rests on its structural orchestration rather than the LLM’s raw coding capabilities. 

## 7 CONCLUSION 

KernelOPT demonstrates that compiler-generated structure is a powerful inductive bias for LLM-driven kernel optimization. By preserving vendor library dispatch and focusing LLM effort on the Triton-generated sub-kernels, the system achieves consistent improvements across 250 KernelBench problems ( 1.40 × geomean on L1, 1.15 × on L2, 1.07 × on L3), with the four-gate verification en-suring that every output either improves on or preserves the compiler baseline. Gains are largest on pointwise/reduction operations, cross-boundary operator fusion, and fused epilogues in multi-kernel models. The current implementation requires NVIDIA Nsight Compute profiling with elevated GPU performance counter permissions, consumes ∼60 K tokens per NCU prompt (limiting backends to 

>100 K-context models), and targets single-GPU inference only. Several directions merit explo-ration. Since 72% of fallbacks arise from cuBLAS/cuDNN dominance, optimizing vendor library 

configurations (algorithm selection, workspace size, math mode) could recover performance where kernel replacement cannot. The 250 optimization trajectories also constitute an SFT corpus: pre-training an open-weight model on them, augmented with RL from the verification signal, could yield a synthesis model that generates strong first-attempt Triton code, decoupling optimization quality from the compiler’s intermediate representation. More broadly, our results suggest that LLM-driven program optimization systems should work with compilers by exploiting their structural annota-tions rather than around them; because kernel performance is hardware-sensitive, future work will also establish a unified benchmark for head-to-head evaluation against other tools and open-weight models. AI U SE STATEMENT 

In preparing this work, we used large language model (LLM) based tools in three capacities, all of which we disclose here. First, to aid and polish writing : LLM assistants were used to improve the clarity, grammar, and concision of author-written prose. Second, for retrieval and discovery :LLM tools assisted in locating and surfacing related work, which we subsequently verified against the primary sources cited herein. Third, to draft sections : LLM assistants produced initial drafts of portions of the text, which the authors then revised, fact-checked, and edited. We emphasize that the use of an LLM as the optimization backend of KernelOPT (Claude Sonnet, §5) is a component of the proposed method and is described in the main text, distinct from the writing-assistance uses 9disclosed here. All AI-assisted content was reviewed by the authors; every quantitative claim, table, and figure was generated from our own experimental pipeline and verified by the authors. We take full responsibility for the final content of this work, including all text, claims, and artifacts. ETHICS STATEMENT 

This work concerns performance optimization of GPU kernels and does not involve human subjects, personally identifiable information, or sensitive data. The KernelBench benchmark used for evalua-tion is a publicly available, permissively licensed research artifact. Potential societal considerations are limited to the compute and energy footprint of the optimization procedure: our full evaluation consumed ∼1,100 H200 GPU-hours and ∼115 M LLM tokens. We note that the goal of the system is producing faster kernels hence reducing the inference-time energy cost of downstream models, and that the four-gate verification cascade is explicitly designed to prevent the deployment of incorrect kernels. We declare no conflicts of interest. REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT 

We have taken several steps to support reproducibility. The problem formulation and four-gate verification function are stated precisely in Section 3 (Eqs. 1–5); the search procedure is given as pseudocode in Algorithm 1. All hyperparameters are fixed across all 250 problems with no per-level tuning and are enumerated in full in Section 5 ( T =5 , N =4 , K=4 , B=4 , γ=1 .03 ,

Q=8 , s+=1 .05 , s−=1 .20 , ρmax =10 ), along with the hardware (single NVIDIA H200), profil-ing configuration ( ncu --set full , kernel replay), and benchmarking protocol ( do bench ,warmup=25 ms, rep=100 ms). The evaluation uses the public KernelBench benchmark with its stan-dard allclose tolerances. The weighted-random-sampled ablation problem list is provided in the supplementary material, and the complete codebase is available at https://github.com/ TorchedHat/KernelOPT .ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank the Red Hat PyTorch Engineering team for their support and for providing the compute resources used in this work. We are grateful to Joseph Groenenboom and Ali Raza for their project direction and technical guidance throughout the internship, and to Arkadip Maitra for reviewing early drafts. 

## REFERENCES             

> Jason Ansel, Edward Yang, Horace He, Natalia Gimelshein, Animesh Jain, Michael Voznesensky, Bin Bao, Peter Bell, David Berber, Matthias Burber, et al. PyTorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic Python bytecode transformation and graph compilation. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , 2024. Jason Ansel et al. Helion: A DSL for low-level Triton kernel programming. https://github.com/ pytorch-labs/helion , 2025. PyTorch Labs. Arijit Bhattacharjee, Heng Ping, Son Vu Le, Paul Bogdan, Nesreen K. Ahmed, and Ali Jannesari. Op-tiML: An end-to-end framework for program synthesis and CUDA kernel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12305, 2026. Shiyi Cao, Ziming Mao, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. K-Search: LLM kernel generation via co-evolving intrinsic world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.19128, 2026. Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. TVM: An automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems De-sign and Implementation (OSDI) , pp. 578–594, 2018. Sharan Chetlur, Cliff Woolley, Philippe Vandermersch, Jonathan Cohen, John Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan Shelhamer. cuDNN: Efficient primitives for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.0759, 2014. Tri Dao. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024.

10 Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher R´ e. FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 35, pp. 16344–16359, 2022. Jaber Jaber and Osama Jaber. AutoKernel: Autonomous GPU kernel optimization via iterative agent-driven search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.21331, 2026. LangChain Inc. LangGraph: Building language agents as graphs. https://github.com/ langchain-ai/langgraph , 2024. NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA cuBLAS Library. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cublas/ ,2024a. CUDA Toolkit Documentation. NVIDIA Corporation. NVIDIA Nsight Compute. https://developer.nvidia.com/ nsight-compute , 2024b. Performance Profiler for CUDA Applications. Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L. Zhang, William Hu, Christopher R´ e, and Azalia Mirhoseini. KernelBench: Can LLMs write efficient GPU kernels? In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2025. Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Fr´ edo Durand, and Saman Amaras-inghe. Halide: A language and compiler for optimizing parallelism, locality, and recomputation in image processing pipelines. In Proceedings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pp. 519–530, 2013. Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri Dao. FlashAttention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08691, 2024. Benjamin F. Spector, Simran Arora, Aaryan Singhal, Daniel Y. Fu, and Christopher R´ e. ThunderKittens: Simple, fast, and adorable AI kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20399, 2024. Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. Triton: An intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL) , pp. 10–19, 2019. Laura Wang, Kaiming Cheng, Yilun Xu, Jiafei Pan, Guanglei Zhou, Rui Li, Zhisong Zhang, and Kevin Zhu. KernelFalcon: Autonomous GPU kernel genera-tion via deep agents. PyTorch Blog, 2025. https://pytorch.org/blog/ kernelfalcon-autonomous-gpu-kernel-generation-via-deep-agents/ .Anjiang Wei et al. Astra: A multi-agent system for GPU kernel performance optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07506, 2025. Mengdi Wu, Xinhao Cheng, Shengyu Liu, Chunan Shi, Jianan Ji, Man Kit Ao, Praveen Velliengiri, Xupeng Miao, Oded Padon, and Zhihao Jia. Mirage: A Multi-Level superoptimizer for tensor programs. In Pro-ceedings of the 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) , pp. 235–252, 2025. Genghan Zhang, Shaowei Zhu, Anjiang Wei, Zhenyu Song, Allen Nie, Zhen Jia, Nandita Vijaykumar, Yida Wang, and Kunle Olukotun. AccelOpt: A self-improving LLM agentic system for AI accelerator kernel optimization. OpenReview preprint, 2026. https://openreview.net/forum?id=SBS4NJHYjZ .Zijian Zhang, Ruibo Wang, Siyuan Li, Yilong Luo, Mingyi Hong, and Chen Ding. CudaForge: An agent framework with hardware feedback for CUDA kernel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01884, 2025. Lianmin Zheng, Chengfan Jia, Minmin Sun, Zao Zhao, Cody Hao Yu, Ameer Haj-Ali, Yida Wang, Jun Yang, Danyang Zhuo, Koushik Sen, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Ansor: Generating high-performance tensor programs for deep learning. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-mentation (OSDI) , pp. 863–879, 2020. 

## A AGENT PROMPT TEMPLATES 

The KernelOPT pipeline uses six agent prompts (five LLM-driven, one deterministic profiler). Be-low are the system prompts used to instruct each LLM agent. These prompts are fixed across all 250 KernelBench experiments reported in the paper. Helion-specific configuration references and the Triton API appendix (appended at runtime) are omitted for brevity. 11 A.1 PLANNER AGENT 

The Planner receives Nsight Compute (NCU) profiling context and the kernel source code. It classi-fies the kernel bottleneck (memory-bound, compute-bound, or underutilized), searches optimization memory for past attempts, and produces one actionable optimization plan per invocation. Multi-ple Planner instances run in parallel (one per beam chain) with diversity hints to ensure different optimization directions. 

You are the Planner Agent in a GPU kernel optimization pipeline. You receive a profiling context from Nsight Compute (NCU) and the kernel source code. Your job is to identify one concrete optimization opportunity and produce an actionable plan for the Executor Agent. WORKFLOW -- follow these steps in order: 1. DIAGNOSE: Query optimization_strategy, rules, throughput, and occupancy. Classify the kernel as memory-bound, compute-bound, or underutilized based on Memory SOL% vs Compute SOL%. 2. INSPECT: Read the kernel source. Identify which loops, loads, stores, or tile parameters are involved in the bottleneck. 3. SEARCH: Check optimization memory for past attempts on similar kernels. Avoid directions that previously failed or regressed. 4. PLAN: Choose ONE specific optimization that targets the diagnosed bottleneck. The change must be minimal, measurable, and implementable in a single diff. Prefer @triton.autotune for parameter exploration. 5. SUBMIT: Call submit_plan with the plan. Use your tools: query_profiling_context(aspect) -- inspect specific profiling sections aspects: optimization_strategy, rules, occupancy, memory_workload, throughput, scheduler, launch, gpu_specs, instruction_stats, multi_kernel_summary get_kernel_source() -- read the kernel source code search_memory(query) -- check past optimization experience OPTIMIZATION GUIDANCE: The kernel file may contain multiple GPU kernels (cuBLAS GEMM, cuDNN conv, Triton @jit kernels, runtime kernels). Focus your plan on the @triton.jit kernel(s) and their launch parameters -- this is where real acceleration happens. Library calls (extern_kernels.mm, cuBLAS, cuDNN) are already hardware-optimized by NVIDIA and are extremely difficult to beat with hand-written code. Propose library call rewrites only if you have strong evidence from the NCU metrics that the library call is the bottleneck AND a viable Triton alternative exists. When you have gathered enough information, call submit_plan(plan) with your plan. The plan must: - Target a specific, measurable bottleneck in the @triton.jit kernel(s) - Reference the exact construct in the kernel source to modify - Be implementable in one focused diff by the Executor Agent - Include enough detail in step.change and step.implementation_hints that the Executor does not need to re-read profiling data Optimization strategies to consider (in priority order): 1. Add @triton.autotune with multiple configurations to explore tile sizes, num_warps, and num_stages automatically at runtime 2. Adjust tile sizes (XBLOCK, YBLOCK, num_warps, num_stages) for better occupancy 3. Improve memory access patterns (coalescing, vectorized loads, L2 compression) 4. Reduce register pressure or branch divergence 5. Change eviction policies and cache hints 6. Fuse adjacent @triton.jit pointwise kernels (NOT library call fusion) 7. Precision optimization (FP32 ->BF16/FP16 where safe for stores/intermediates) WARNING: Do NOT suggest allow_tf32=True or BF16 casts for tl.dot operands in GEMM kernels. TF32 truncates FP32 mantissa from 23 to 10 bits and BF16 truncates to 7 bits. For large K (>512), accumulated error exceeds atol=1e-3. Precision reduction is only safe for pointwise stores/intermediates, NOT for dot-product accumulation in matmul kernels. 8. Algorithmic improvements (single-pass reductions, loop reordering, tiling) 9. Cross-operation fusion: Fuse cross-reduction + elementwise sequences that Inductor would decompose into multiple kernels (fused LayerNorm, fused softmax, residual + norm in one pass) 10. GEMM epilogue fusion: Fuse matmul + bias + activation into one kernel using tl.dot. 11. Warp specialization: Assign different warp groups to different tasks. 12. Persistent kernel scheduling: For workloads with many small tiles, 

12 use a persistent kernel where each SM processes multiple tiles in aloop rather than launching one CTA per tile. INDUCTOR ANALYSIS -- when diagnosing torch.compile output, reason about what Inductor would do vs what an optimal Triton kernel can achieve: - How many kernels would Inductor generate for this operation? - Which operations would it fuse? Which would it keep separate? - Where are the memory traffic bottlenecks between Inductor’s kernels? - Can the Triton kernel fuse operations that Inductor keeps separate? When the profiling context includes "Applicable Optimization Techniques", prioritize those techniques -- they are pre-selected based on the kernel’s bottleneck profile, type, and GPU architecture. [Helion-specific planning guidance appended at runtime for Helion kernels.] 

A.2 EXECUTOR AGENT 

The Executor implements the Planner’s optimization plan by modifying the Triton kernel source. It receives compile errors and correctness failures as in-conversation feedback for up to K retry attempts. The prompt below is condensed; the full Helion configuration reference and Triton API appendix ( ∼200 additional lines) are appended at runtime. 

You are the Executor Agent in a GPU kernel optimization pipeline. You receive an optimization plan and a kernel source file. Your job is to implement exactly the change described in the plan. WORKFLOW -- follow these steps in order: 1. ANALYZE: Read the kernel source and optimization plan. Identify the EXACT lines that need to change. State them. 2. REASON: In 2-3 sentences explain WHY this change improves performance, referencing the NCU bottleneck from the plan’s evidence. 3. IMPLEMENT: Make the MINIMAL change described in the plan. Modify ONLY the identified lines. Do not refactor, restructure, or rewrite from scratch. Copy the original kernel, then apply surgical edits. 4. VERIFY before submitting -- check each of these: - Function signature matches the original exactly (name, params, order) - All variables are defined (no new undefined constants) - All tl.* calls exist in the Triton API - If @triton.autotune added, config keys match existing constexpr params - Code is syntactically valid Python 5. SUBMIT: Call submit_kernel(kernel_source, change_summary). CRITICAL RULES (violations will be auto-rejected): *** MOST IMPORTANT RULE *** 1. The function signature MUST be IDENTICAL to the original: - SAME function name, parameter names, order, and count - Do NOT add, remove, or rename any params 2. Every variable must come from: function parameters, computed locally, or Triton builtins. Do NOT introduce undefined constants. 3. Submit ONLY the @triton.jit function (with decorators and body). 4. If adding @triton.autotune configs, the config keys must match EXISTING constexpr parameters. 5. Do NOT restructure tiling (2D to 1D or vice versa). 6. Do NOT replace Triton computation with PyTorch calls. TRITON AUTOTUNING: @triton.autotune(configs=[...], key=[...], reset_to_zero=[...]) Critical: MASKING -- When adding @triton.autotune with configs that increase XBLOCK/RBLOCK beyond the original, EVERY tl.load and tl.store MUST have a mask= argument. This is the #1 cause of kernel crashes. NUMERICAL STABILITY: - Always accumulate reductions and tl.dot in float32 - Do NOT set allow_tf32=True on tl.dot unless explicitly asked - Cast to output dtype only on the final tl.store If submit_kernel returns a validation error, diagnose and resubmit. [Full Triton API reference and Helion Config reference appended at runtime.] 

A.3 SUMMARIZER AGENT 

The Summarizer distills each optimization attempt (successful or failed) into a structured experience item for the memory queue. It performs causal attribution by diffing the kernel code and profiling metrics, then generalizes the insight for transfer to future kernels. 

You are the Summarizer Agent. Your job is to learn from what just happened and encode that learning into a reusable experience item. You do not apply rules. You observe, reason about causation, and write a

13 generalized insight. ## Summarization process ### Step 1 -- Identify the causal change Diff the slow and fast kernels. Find the minimal code region responsible for the performance difference. Verify against the actual diff. ### Step 2 -- Attribute the effect to metrics Compare profiling_context before and after. Which metrics changed, by how much? This is the causal chain: code change X ->metric Y moved from A to B ->latency improved. Do not speculate. Only attribute effects that appear in profiling data. ### Step 3 -- Generalize the insight Ask: if a different kernel had the same profiling signature, would this change help? Write strategy_description at that level of generality. Reference profiling signals (metric names, values, NCU rules) not specific variable names. ### Step 4 -- Write the pseudocode Extract the key structural change as framework-neutral pseudocode. Strip boilerplate. Keep loop structure, tile parameters, and access patterns. Label framework-specific syntax. ### Step 5 -- Deduplication check Scan existing memory queue. If an item with the same direction exists: - Higher speedup: replace the old one - Lower speedup: skip - Different manifestation: keep both (append _v2 suffix) ## Output format Two JSON objects separated by a blank line: 1. experience_item: {item_id, iteration, speedup, rewrite_type, framework, direction, profiling_signal, strategy_title, strategy_description, slow_pseudocode, fast_pseudocode, applicable_when, do_not_apply_when, framework_notes} 2. memory_update: {action: "append"|"replace"|"skip", replace_item_id, reason} ## Negative rewrite guidance For regressions, explain which metrics got worse and why. The strategy_description must explain the structural anti-pattern. 

A.4 PROFILER AGENT 

The Profiler determines the optimal NCU profiling configuration (kernel name filter, launch skip/-count, replay mode) by analyzing the kernel source for framework markers, tensor initialization patterns, and benchmark loop structure. 

You are the Profiler Agent in a GPU kernel optimization pipeline. Your job: determine the optimal NCU profiling configuration for agiven kernel. For files with multiple kernel launches (Inductor-generated, multi-kernel Triton): set launch_count to null (profile ALL kernels) so the pipeline can discover the bottleneck. Tools available: read_kernel_source() -- read the full kernel file submit_ncu_config(...) -- submit your configuration When analyzing the source: 1. Identify the framework from decorators: - @triton.jit or @tl.jit ->Triton - @helion.kernel or @hl.kernel ->Helion 2. Set kernel_name: - Triton / Helion: set kernel_name = "" (empty string). Triton JIT-compiles kernels and gives them mangled names that do NOT match the Python function name. 3. Infer launch_skip from the benchmark harness: - Count torch/numpy tensor init calls before the first kernel call. Each torch.randn / torch.zeros on GPU = 1 kernel launch. 4. Infer launch_count from steady-state repetitions: - Look for a timing/profiling loop. Default to 1 if no loop found. 5. Extract kernel_args -- any CLI flags the script requires. 6. Choose replay_mode: - Triton / Helion: always use ’application’. JIT-compiled kernels are not compatible with NCU kernel replay. Call submit_ncu_config once. Do NOT produce a human-readable summary. 

14 A.5 CODEGEN (S YNTHESIS ) A GENT 

Used during Inductor-aware synthesis to generate standalone Triton kernels from ATen operation specifications. The LLM receives operation names, tensor shapes, and dtypes, and must produce a self-contained file with an autotuned kernel, a wrapper function, and an input generator. The prompt below is condensed; full code examples ( ∼150 lines) are omitted. 

You are an expert GPU kernel engineer. You write high-performance Triton kernels from PyTorch operation specifications. Given a description of what computation to implement (ATen ops, tensor shapes, dtypes), you produce a complete, runnable Python file containing: 1. A @triton.jit kernel (optionally with @triton.autotune) 2. A kernel_function(*inputs) wrapper 3. A get_inputs() function returning sample input tensors RULES: - Import only: torch, triton, triton.language as tl - Use float32 accumulators for numerical stability - Include boundary masks for ALL tl.load and tl.store calls - Include @triton.autotune with at least 4 configs - CRITICAL: When using @triton.autotune with variable BLOCK sizes, EVERY tl.load/tl.store MUST have a mask= argument. CRITICAL -- DO NOT REPLACE CUBLAS/CUDNN WITH TRITON: When the ATen ops include matmul (mm, addmm, bmm), linear, or convolution, Inductor calls cuBLAS/cuDNN for these via extern_kernels. These library calls are FASTER than any hand-written Triton matmul or convolution. Do NOT rewrite them as tl.dot loops. Instead, structure your kernel as: 1. KEEP the matmul/conv as a standard PyTorch call 2. FUSE ONLY the epilogue operations (activation, normalization, scaling) into a Triton kernel that reads the matmul/conv output and applies the epilogue in one pass. BEATING TORCH.COMPILE (INDUCTOR): 1. EPILOGUE FUSION: Fuse bias/activation/normalization after cuBLAS 2. CROSS-REDUCTION FUSION: Single-pass LayerNorm instead of 3 kernels 3. MULTI-OP SEQUENCES: Keep intermediates in registers/SRAM 4. CUSTOM ALGORITHMS: Flash attention, online softmax 5. SPECIALIZED TILING: Hand-tuned @triton.autotune configs ANTI-CHEATING CONSTRAINTS: All core computation logic MUST be in @triton.jit kernels. Banned: torch.matmul, torch.mm, F.linear, F.conv2d, F.layer_norm, F.gelu, F.softmax, F.scaled_dot_product_attention, extern_kernels.*, trivial identity/no-op computation. [Full code examples and fusion patterns omitted for brevity.] 

A.6 FUSION AGENT 

The Fusion Agent fuses adjacent Triton kernels into a single kernel to eliminate intermediate mem-ory round-trips. It receives the source of N adjacent kernels connected by intermediate buffers and produces a single fused kernel that keeps intermediate values in registers. 

You are an expert GPU kernel engineer specializing in Triton kernel fusion. Your task: given N adjacent Triton kernels that are connected by intermediate buffers, produce a SINGLE fused Triton kernel that eliminates those buffers and performs all computation in one pass. Rules: 1. The fused kernel must accept the same external inputs and produce the same external outputs as the original kernel sequence. 2. Eliminate ALL intermediate buffers listed under "eliminated_buffers". 3. Preserve numerical correctness: use the same dtypes, same element-wise computation, and avoid precision loss. 4. The fused kernel must be a valid Triton kernel with @triton.jit. 5. Return ONLY the fused kernel Python source. 6. The function name must be exactly: fused_kernel 7. Include a call wrapper named fused_kernel_call(...). 8. ALL computation must be in the @triton.jit kernel. Do NOT call torch.nn.*, torch.nn.functional.*, torch.matmul, or any PyTorch compute API in the wrapper. FUSION TECHNIQUES: POINTWISE + POINTWISE: Merge computation bodies. Load inputs once, apply both operations, store once. Keep intermediates in registers. REDUCTION + POINTWISE: After the reduction (e.g., mean/variance), 

15 immediately apply the pointwise operation before storing. NORMALIZATION FUSION (LayerNorm/RMSNorm sequences): - Compute mean and variance in a single pass - Normalize, scale, and bias in the same kernel - Accumulate in fp32 for numerical stability ACTIVATION + BIAS FUSION: Load data once, add bias, apply activation (GELU/SiLU/ReLU), store once. RESIDUAL + NORM: Fuse x = residual + dropout(x); x = LayerNorm(x). Both operations touch the same data -- one kernel, one memory pass. 

## B VERIFICATION CASCADE DETAILS 

Table 3 provides the complete specification of all verification gates, including the synthesis-stage validation that precedes the optimization loop. 

Stage Gate Tolerance Seeds Reference Scope 

Synthesis Eager validation r=a=10 −4 2: (0 , 42) PyTorch eager model Per synth. kernel Gate 1 Static validation N/A (crash check) N/A N/A Per candidate Gate 2 Multi-seed corr. r=a=10 −3 3: [0 , 42 , 1337] Synthesized Triton Per candidate Gate 3 Model-level (Tier 1) r=a=10 −4 3: [0 , 42 , 123] Re-stitched model End-to-end Model-level (Tier 2) ρ ≤ 10 or abs bound Float64 reference End-to-end Gate 4 Performance gate γ = 1 .03 (3%) N/A do bench (25/100 ms) End-to-end 

Table 3: Complete verification gate specification. Gates 1–2 run on every candidate during opti-mization; Gates 3–4 run once on the re-stitched model after optimization completes. r and a denote 

rtol and atol .

Float64 fallback (Gate 3, Tier 2). When the strict 10 −4 comparison fails, a float64 refer-ence disambiguates numerical noise from algorithmic errors. Let dref = ∥rf 32 − rf 64 ∥∞ and 

dopt = ∥of 32 − rf 64 ∥∞. In the normal case (dref ≥ 10 −8), the error ratio ρ = dopt /d ref passes if ρ ≤ 10 ; in practice, correct TF32 kernels yield ρ ∈ [1 , 3] while algorithmically incorrect ker-nels yield ρ > 100 . In the degenerate case (dref < 10 −8, for exact operations such as max ,

argmax , sort ), a scale-relative check is used: dopt / max( ∥rf 32 ∥∞, 10 −12 ) ≤ 10 −4. An abso-lute error bound dopt ≤ max(5 ×10 −3, 10 −3 · ∥ rf 32 ∥∞) handles fused kernels where Inductor’s separate-operation approach anchors precision artificially; this bound accommodates the expected TF32 accumulation error (mantissa truncation from 23 to 10 bits in tl.dot ). 

Weight extraction (Gate 3). When Inductor externalizes model parameters as explicit function arguments, the optimized kernel’s input generator would produce random values for weights. The system intercepts Inductor’s argument flattening via torch.compile (m, backend = fcapture ),where fcapture records the exact flat argument list in Inductor’s order with real model state. Data inputs are identified by shape/dtype matching and replaced with seed-consistent random values; model state arguments are preserved. 

## C SHIPPED OPTIMIZATION GUIDELINES 

KernelOPT ships benchmark-derived optimization guidelines as cold-start context. These were ex-tracted post-hoc from the completed 250 KernelBench runs (three weeks after evaluation) and do not affect the results reported in the paper. Table 4 summarizes the guidelines organized by kernel type. 

## D ABLATION RESULTS 

The ablation study evaluates five degraded configurations on a stratified sample of 50 problems (20 L1, 20 L2, 10 L3). An additional configuration (C6) is evaluated on L2 only. Table 5 defines each configuration, and Table 6 reports the per-configuration outcome counts and geometric mean speedup of optimized kernels. Figure 2 visualizes the aggregate outcome. 16 Category Strategy Succ. Fail.                                          

> Matmul SMEM bank conflict padding 20TF32 tensor cores 20Add Triton autotune 40SMEM padding (alt) 20Pointwise Add Triton autotune 130 2TF32 tensor cores 11 1Vectorized loads (contiguous) 80Reduce register pressure (autotune) 20Num stages for latency hiding 20Vectorized loads (alignment) 20Fix coalescing via 3D grid 20Fix uncoalesced via tile swap 30Persistent tile scheduling 32Vectorized loads (autotune) 31Multi-row per CTA coalesced stores 20Online softmax attention 20Cap registers ( maxnreg )20Increase XBLOCK with autotune 30Reduction Add Triton autotune 70Expand autotune for grid util. 02

Table 4: Shipped optimization guidelines by kernel category. Success/failure counts reflect how often a strategy produced a speedup vs. a regression during post-hoc extraction from the 250-kernel evaluation. The extraction script recorded binary success/fail per attempt; per-strategy speedup magnitudes were not tracked, so no average or maximum speedup column is included. Strategies with 0 failures and ≥2 successes are included in the default cold-start context.                    

> Config Ablated Component Flag
> C0 Full system (baseline) (default) C1 Greedy search (no beam) --beam-width 1
> C2 No optimization memory --no-memory
> C3 No E2E performance gate --no-e2e-perf-gate
> C4 No NCU profiling context --skip-ncu
> C5 Single iteration ( T=1 )-T 1
> C6 Optimize all sub-kernels L2 only

Table 5: Ablation configurations. C0 is the full system with beam width 4, 5 iterations, NCU profiling, optimization memory, and E2E performance gate. 

Sampled kernels. The 50 problems are selected via weighted random sampling that preserves the outcome-category distribution within each level: • L1 (20): 002, 003, 006, 007, 009, 012, 015, 022, 028, 036, 039, 042, 043, 049, 059, 064, 075, 086, 094, 095. • L2 (20): 001, 003, 009, 010, 018, 020, 029, 032, 039, 042, 049, 050, 053, 055, 056, 068, 077, 081, 093, 098. • L3 (10): 002, 005, 009, 012, 014, 019, 030, 038, 044, 047. 

Observations. 

• Beam search (C1): Greedy selection (beam width 1) reduces optimized kernels from 19 to 5. Without multi-chain exploration, the system converges to a single optimization direction early. • Memory (C2): Without experience accumulation, L1 drops from 10 to 4 optimized and all L2/L3 optimizations are lost. The system lacks the feedback to avoid repeating failed strategies. 17 L1 (20) L2 (20) L3 (10) Config Opt Match Fall Opt Match Fall Opt Match Fall Geomean                                                                        

> C0 (full) 10 646773161.94 ×
> C1 (no beam) 4313 1019 0010 1.78 ×
> C2 (no memory) 4313 0020 0010 1.23 ×
> C3 (no perf gate) 3314 0020 0010 1.14 ×
> C4 (no NCU) 3413 2018 0010 3.16 ×
> C5 ( T=1 )3314 1118 0010 2.48 ×
> C6 (all kernels) –––0020 ––––

Table 6: Ablation results summary. The C0 row shows the full-system results on the same 50-kernel subset. “Opt” = optimized (speedup >1.03 ×), “Match” = within 3% of baseline, “Fall” = fell back to baseline. C6 runs only on L2. Geomean is computed over optimized kernels only. 

Figure 2: Ablation study results. Each bar group shows the number of optimized, matched, and fallback kernels per configuration across L1, L2, and L3 subsets. The full system (C0) achieves 19 optimizations; removing any single component reduces this to ≤5. C6 (optimize all sub-kernels, L2 only) produces zero optimizations because the LLM wastes attempts replacing vendor library calls. • Performance gate (C3): Without the γ=1 .03 gate, only 3 L1 kernels optimize. The gate also triggers targeted retries that recover otherwise-lost optimizations. • NCU profiling (C4): Without profiling context, 5 kernels still optimize (including 2 L2 cases where the improvement is algorithmic rather than profiling-guided), but the planner lacks bottleneck classification. • Single iteration (C5): With T =1 , 4 kernels optimize. Later iterations build on partial improvements from earlier attempts. • Inductor-aware filtering (C6): Without filtering out cuBLAS/cuDNN sub-kernels, all 20 L2 kernels fall back because the LLM attempts to replace vendor library calls with Triton code. 

## E NCU P ROFILING CASE STUDIES 

Table 7 summarizes representative optimization traces from each level (referenced from the main-text results in §4.4), and Table 8 presents detailed Nsight Compute metrics for three representa-tive kernels, illustrating the relationship between sub-kernel profiling data and end-to-end (E2E) speedup. The baseline metrics (Compute SOL%, Memory SOL%, registers per thread, achieved occupancy, and kernel duration) are collected via ncu --set full in application replay mode. 18 Kernel Comp (%) Mem (%) Occ (%) Planner direction (iter.) Sub-k E2E                            

> L1 matmul kernel (007) Regs/thread: 184
> 57 47 12.4 Iter 1: fast accum fp16 dot ;regs 184 →125, occ. 12 →24% 2.33 ×2.89 ×
> L2 fused linear mul hardtanh gelu (053) Regs/thread: 255 (max) 37 59 12.5 Iter 1: reduce regs (1.0 ×); Iter 3: tf32x3 tensor cores
> (3.12 ×)3.12 ×1.60 ×
> L3 gemm bias relu
> (002, MLP) Regs/thread: 198
> 60 67 12.2 Iter 1: reduce reg pressure
> (1.02 ×); Iter 3:
> k loop peeling (1.12 ×)1.12 ×4.12 ×

Table 7: Representative optimization traces from each level. Comp /Mem /Occ are baseline NCU metrics (compute utilization %, memory utilization %, and achieved occupancy %). Planner direc-tion shows selected strategy per iteration. Sub-k is sub-kernel speedup; E2E is model-level speedup versus compiler baseline.                                          

> Kernel Variant Comp % Mem % Regs Occ % Duration Sub-k
> L1-007 (matmul) Baseline 57.1 46.7 184 12.4 5.95 ms —E2E 2.89 ×Optimized (fp16 dot) 33.8 75.4 125 24.1 1.82 ms 3.27 ×
> L1-012 (diag matmul) Baseline (synth.) 14.0 69.0 18 81.2 32.83 μs—E2E 88.63 ×; speedup from algorithmic rewrite ( O(N3)→O(N2)), not NCU-guided micro-optimization. L2-018 (fused chain) Baseline (synth.) 21.8 56.1 29 45.9 12.45 μs—E2E 33.11 ×; speedup from fusing 5 operations with algebraic simplification.

Table 8: Nsight Compute profiling metrics for three representative kernels. Comp/Mem = com-pute/memory Speed-of-Light; Regs = registers per thread; Occ = achieved occupancy; Duration = per-launch kernel time. L1-007 metrics match the main paper (Table 7: 57%, 47%, 12.4%). 

L1-007: Register pressure reduction. The baseline matmul kernel uses 184 registers per thread, limiting achieved occupancy to 12.4% on H200 (theoretical max ⌊65536 /184 ⌋ = 356 threads per SM, vs. 2048 maximum). The optimized variant casts operands to FP16 before tl.dot , reducing register consumption to 125 per thread and doubling occupancy to 24.1%. The shift from compute-bound (57.1% compute SOL) to memory-bound (75.4% memory SOL) is expected: the doubled occupancy saturates the memory subsystem before compute units become the bottleneck. The sub-kernel speedup of 3.27 × translates to a 2.89 × E2E model speedup after accounting for non-kernel overhead. 

L1-012: Algorithmic rewrite. The 88.63 × E2E speedup comes from replacing an O(N 3)

cuBLAS GEMM ( torch.diag(A) @ B constructing a full 4096 × 4096 diagonal matrix) with an O(N 2) element-wise row-scaling Triton kernel. The baseline cuBLAS kernel has high occu-pancy (81.2%) and low compute utilization (14.0%), indicating that the hardware efficiently executes the GEMM but wastes >99 .99% of multiply-accumulate operations on zero entries. NCU-guided micro-optimization would not detect this opportunity; the speedup arises from the synthesis agent’s algebraic reasoning. 

L2-018: Operator fusion with algebraic simplification. The baseline executes a 6-operation chain (Linear → Sum → Max → Mean → LogSumExp → LogSumExp) as separate Inductor kernels with HBM round-trips between each operation. KernelOPT’s synthesis agent discovers that the linear-then-sum composition can be algebraically simplified from an (M, K ) × (K, N ) GEMM to a 

(M, K ) · (K, ) dot product using precomputed weight column sums, reducing arithmetic complexity from O(M N K ) to O(M K ) and eliminating all intermediate memory traffic. 19 F COMPLETE KERNEL BENCH RESULTS 

Table 9 presents the complete per-kernel results across all 250 KernelBench problems (100 L1 + 100 L2 + 50 L3). Category codes: OPT = optimized (speedup >1.03 ×), MAT = matched (within 3% of baseline), FALL = fell back to baseline (no regression). Fallback reasons: G = GEMM-dominant, C = Conv-dominant, NI = no improvement found, TO = timeout (still produced result), CE = correctness failed, SF = synthesis failed, NT = no Triton kernels, PR = perf regression. Figure 3 shows the speedup distribution by level. 

Figure 3: Speedup distribution histograms by KernelBench level. L1 (100 kernels): 51 optimized, 34 matched, 15 fallback, geomean 1.40 ×. L2 (100 kernels): 31 optimized, 35 matched, 34 fallback, geomean 1.15 ×. L3 (50 kernels): 14 optimized, 4 matched, 32 fallback, geomean 1.07 ×. All levels report zero regressions: every kernel either improves or preserves the compiler baseline. Table 9: Complete per-kernel KernelBench results across all 250 problems, laid out in two side-by-side blocks (read left block top-to-bottom, then right block). Speed is E2E model speedup vs. 

torch.compile ; “–” denotes a fallback (baseline preserved). 

Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn 

L1 001 5.77 × OPT Matmul TO L1 002 6.06 × OPT Matmul L1 003 5.11 × OPT Matmul L1 004 1.30 × OPT Matmul L1 005 1.01 × OPT L1 006 0.98 × MAT Matmul L1 007 2.89 × OPT Matmul L1 008 2.63 × OPT Matmul TO L1 009 2.07 × OPT Matmul L1 010 5.79 × OPT Matmul L1 011 1.05 × OPT Einsum L1 012 88.63 × OPT Matmul L1 013 5.79 × OPT Matmul L1 014 14.04 × OPT Matmul L1 015 20.26 × OPT Matmul L1 016 – FALL Matmul NI L1 017 8.65 × OPT Matmul TO L1 018 3.03 × OPT Matmul L1 019 1.00 × MAT L1 020 1.01 × OPT L1 021 1.01 × OPT L1 022 0.97 × MAT L1 023 1.02 × OPT L1 024 0.97 × MAT L1 025 1.01 × OPT L1 026 1.05 × OPT L1 027 0.97 × MAT L1 028 0.97 × MAT L1 029 1.02 × OPT L1 030 0.98 × MAT L1 031 1.00 × MAT L1 032 0.97 × MAT L1 033 1.00 × MAT BatchNorm L1 034 1.01 × OPT InstanceNorm L1 035 – FALL GroupNorm NI L1 036 1.10 × OPT TO L1 037 1.01 × OPT L1 038 1.26 × OPT L1 039 1.38 × OPT L1 040 1.02 × OPT LayerNorm TO L1 041 – OPT Pooling TO L1 042 – FALL Pooling NI L1 043 3.41 × OPT Pooling TO L1 044 – FALL Pooling NI L1 045 2.16 × OPT Pooling L1 046 1.00 × MAT Pooling L1 047 – FALL Reduction NI L1 048 1.22 × OPT L1 049 – FALL NI L1 050 1.02 × OPT Conv L1 051 – FALL NI L1 052 1.01 × OPT TO L1 053 1.02 × OPT L1 054 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 055 1.06 × OPT Conv L1 056 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 057 1.05 × OPT ConvTranspose L1 058 – FALL ConvTranspose NI L1 059 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 060 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 061 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 062 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 063 1.07 × OPT Conv L1 064 – FALL ConvTranspose NI L1 065 1.03 × OPT ConvTranspose L1 066 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 067 – FALL Conv NI L1 068 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 069 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 070 0.99 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 071 1.06 × OPT ConvTranspose L1 072 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 073 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 074 – FALL ConvTranspose NI 

Continued on next page 

20 (Table 9 continued) 

Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn 

L1 075 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 076 – FALL Conv NI L1 077 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 078 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 079 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L1 080 – FALL Conv NI L1 081 1.03 × OPT ConvTranspose L1 082 1.05 × OPT Conv L1 083 1.00 × MAT Conv L1 084 1.06 × OPT Conv L1 085 11.38 × OPT Conv L1 086 – FALL Conv NI L1 087 1.32 × OPT Conv L1 088 1.00 × MAT L1 089 1.14 × OPT CumSum L1 090 1.19 × OPT L1 091 2.80 × OPT CumSum L1 092 1.65 × OPT CumSum, Cat L1 093 1.08 × OPT CumSum L1 094 1.00 × MAT L1 095 1.70 × OPT L1 096 1.00 × MAT L1 097 – FALL NI L1 098 1.00 × MAT TO L1 099 1.03 × OPT L1 100 1.00 × MAT L2 001 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 002 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L2 003 1.00 × MAT LN, Pool, GELU TO L2 004 1.06 × OPT Conv L2 005 1.01 × OPT ConvTranspose L2 006 1.03 × OPT Conv, Pool L2 007 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 008 1.19 × OPT Conv, Red, Pool L2 009 1.47 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 010 – FALL Pool, ConvT CL2 011 – FALL BN, Pool, ConvT C L2 012 – FALL Linear/GEMM GL2 013 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose TO L2 014 – FALL Matmul, Red GL2 015 1.00 × MAT BN, ConvT L2 016 1.06 × OPT ConvTranspose TO L2 017 0.98 × MAT Conv, IN TO L2 018 33.11 × OPT Linear, Red L2 019 1.09 × OPT ConvT, GN TO L2 020 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L2 021 0.98 × MAT Conv, GN L2 022 7.18 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 023 1.03 × OPT Conv, GN TO L2 024 1.06 × OPT Conv L2 025 1.23 × OPT Conv TO L2 026 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L2 027 1.00 × MAT Conv, GN TO L2 028 – FALL Linear, IN GL2 029 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 030 – FALL Linear, GN GL2 031 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 032 1.04 × OPT Conv TO L2 033 – FALL Linear, BN G L2 034 0.99 × MAT LN, ConvT L2 035 – FALL Conv, Pool C L2 036 1.04 × OPT Red, ConvT L2 037 – FALL Linear, GN G L2 038 1.03 × OPT Pool, ConvT L2 039 – FALL Linear, BN G L2 040 1.51 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 041 – FALL Linear, BN G L2 042 0.98 × MAT Red, ConvT TO L2 043 1.00 × MAT Conv, Pool L2 044 0.99 × MAT ConvTranspose TO L2 045 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 046 – FALL Conv, Pool CL2 047 0.97 × MAT Conv L2 048 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 049 1.17 × OPT ConvTranspose L2 050 1.00 × MAT Pool, ConvT L2 051 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 052 1.00 × MAT Conv, BN L2 053 1.60 × OPT Linear, GELU L2 054 1.00 × MAT Conv TO L2 055 5.46 × OPT Linear, Red, Pool L2 056 – FALL Linear, Red GL2 057 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 058 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L2 059 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 060 1.01 × OPT ConvT, GN L2 061 1.02 × OPT ReLU, ConvT, GN L2 062 – FALL Linear, GN GL2 063 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 064 8.30 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 065 1.00 × MAT Conv, Red, Pool TO L2 066 – FALL Linear/GEMM GL2 067 – FALL Conv C L2 068 – FALL Linear/GEMM GL2 069 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 070 1.43 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 071 – FALL Conv C L2 072 1.00 × MAT BN, Pool, ConvT L2 073 1.03 × OPT Conv, BN L2 074 1.00 × MAT Pool, ConvT L2 075 – FALL Linear, GN G L2 076 – FALL Linear/GEMM GL2 077 1.00 × MAT BN, ConvT TO L2 078 1.00 × MAT Red, Pool, ConvT L2 079 1.01 × OPT Conv, IN TO L2 080 5.78 × OPT Linear/GEMM L2 081 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 082 1.00 × MAT Conv, Pool TO L2 083 1.00 × MAT Conv, GN L2 084 – FALL Linear, BN GL2 085 1.10 × OPT Conv, Pool, GN L2 086 – FALL Linear/GEMM GL2 087 1.17 × OPT Conv L2 088 – FALL Linear, GN GL2 089 1.00 × MAT Pool, ConvT L2 090 1.00 × MAT Conv L2 091 1.04 × OPT ConvTranspose TO L2 092 1.06 × OPT Conv, GN TO L2 093 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose L2 094 – FALL Linear, GN GL2 095 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 096 1.10 × OPT Pool, ConvT TO L2 097 – FALL Linear, BN G L2 098 – FALL Linear, Pool GL2 099 – FALL Linear/GEMM G L2 100 1.00 × MAT ConvTranspose TO L3 001 – FALL Linear, ReLU G L3 002 4.12 × OPT Linear, ReLU L3 003 – FALL Linear, ReLU CE L3 004 0.97 × MAT Conv, Linear, ReLU L3 005 – FALL Conv, Linear, ReLU C L3 006 – FALL Conv, Pool, Cat CL3 007 – FALL Conv, Linear, ReLU CE L3 008 – FALL Conv, BN, ReLU CL3 009 1.55 × OPT Conv, Linear, BN L3 010 – FALL Conv, Linear, BN CL3 011 – FALL Conv, Linear, ReLU C L3 012 – FALL Conv, Linear, ReLU CL3 013 – FALL Conv, BN, ReLU C L3 014 0.98 × MAT Conv, BN, ReLU TO L3 015 1.15 × OPT Conv, Linear, BN L3 016 1.06 × OPT Conv, Linear, BN L3 017 – FALL Conv, ReLU, Cat C L3 018 – FALL Conv, ReLU, Pool CL3 019 – FALL Conv, Linear, BN C L3 020 1.03 × OPT Conv, Linear, BN L3 021 – FALL Conv, BN, ReLU C L3 022 – FALL Conv, Linear, BN CL3 023 – FALL Conv, Linear, BN C L3 024 2.33 × OPT Conv, Linear, BN TO L3 025 – FALL Conv, BN, ReLU C L3 026 – FALL Conv, Linear, BN CL3 027 1.00 × MAT Conv, Linear, BN L3 028 – FALL Linear, GELU, Cat G

Continued on next page 

21 (Table 9 continued)                                                                                                                                  

> Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn Lvl K# Speed Cat Ops Rsn
> L3 029 –FALL Conv, Linear, LN CL3 030 –FALL Conv, Linear, LN CL3 031 1.10 ×OPT LN, Attention TO L3 032 1.11 ×OPT Conv, Linear, Cat L3 033 –FALL Linear, Cat CE L3 034 –FALL Linear, Cat GL3 035 –FALL Linear, LSTM SF L3 036 –FALL Linear, LSTM NT L3 037 –FALL Linear, LSTM NT L3 038 –FALL Linear, LSTM NT L3 039 –FALL GRU NT L3 040 –FALL GRU NT L3 041 –FALL GRU NT L3 042 –FALL GRU NT L3 043 –FALL Linear, Attn, MM GL3 044 –FALL Linear, LN, Attn GL3 045 1.06 ×OPT Conv, BN, Pool TO L3 046 1.09 ×OPT BN, Softmax, Red L3 047 1.08 ×OPT BN, Softmax, Red TO L3 048 1.17 ×OPT CumSum, Cat, Ein L3 049 –FALL CumSum, Cat, Ein PR L3 050 –FALL Linear, Attn, MM G

F.1 FALLBACK ANALYSIS 

Of the 85 fallback kernels across all levels, the root causes break down as follows: 37 GEMM-dominant (cuBLAS, 28 L2 + 9 L3), 24 Conv-dominant (cuDNN, 6 L2 + 18 L3), 15 performance gate rejections (all L1), 7 no Triton kernels (LSTM/GRU use cuDNN RNN), and 2 E2E correctness failures; plus 1 performance regression caught by the gate and 2 timeouts that still produced valid (non-improved) results. Figure 4 visualizes this distribution. 

Figure 4: Root cause distribution for fallback kernels across L1–L3. GEMM-dominant and Conv-dominant cases together account for the majority of fallbacks, reflecting cases where vendor library calls (cuBLAS, cuDNN) are already near-optimal and cannot be improved by Triton kernel replace-ment. F.2 L3 A RCHITECTURE BREAKDOWN 

Table 10 summarizes the Level 3 results grouped by model architecture family, and Figure 5 shows the corresponding distribution of outcomes. Conv-dominant architectures (ResNet, VGG, Efficient-Net, U-Net variants) account for the majority of L3 fallbacks, while MLP-based and attention-based models show higher optimization rates when the non-library sub-kernels contribute meaningful run-time. 

## G GENERATED KERNEL EXAMPLES 

Below are before/after examples showing the original Inductor-generated code and the KernelOPT-optimized version. 22 Architecture n Sub-k Opt Speedup Fall.                                                               

> MLP 33–4 14.12 ×GEMM ResNet 38–52 11.55 ×Conv DenseNet 43–337 21.06–1.15 ×Conv MobileNet/EffNet 67–60 21.03–2.33 ×Conv ViT / Swin / CViT 51–99 21.10–1.11 ×GEMM U-Net/NetVLAD/SSM 51–16 41.06–1.17 ×Perf VGG/AlexNet 322–31 0—Conv Inception/Squeeze 47–115 0—Conv Shuffle/RegNet 39–38 0—Conv LSTM / GRU 80–6 0—No Triton RNN / GPT 54–259 0—GEMM LeNet-5 111 0—Matched
> Total 50 12

Table 10: L3 results by model architecture (all 50 kernels). Sub-k: Inductor-generated Triton sub-kernels per model (range across the family). Opt: number of models optimized. Fall.: dominant fallback cause within each family. 

Figure 5: L3 KernelBench results by architecture family. Each bar shows the outcome (optimized, matched, fallback) for the corresponding model. Models dominated by Conv/GEMM operations tend to fall back because cuBLAS/cuDNN already provides near-optimal performance for these operations; KernelOPT preserves the baseline in all such cases. G.1 L1 K ERNEL 012: D IAGONAL MATRIX MULTIPLY (88.63 ×)This kernel computes C = diag (A) · B where A is a 4096-element vector and B is a 4096 × 4096 

matrix. The original Inductor-generated code calls torch.diag(A) @ B , which constructs a full 

4096 × 4096 diagonal matrix and performs an O(N 3) GEMM via cuBLAS. KernelOPT’s synthesis agent recognizes the algebraic structure and replaces the GEMM with an O(N 2) element-wise row-scaling kernel: each row of B is multiplied by the corresponding diagonal element of A.

Before (Inductor via cuBLAS). The baseline constructs torch.diag(a) (a 4096 × 4096 ma-trix with >99 .99% zeros) and calls extern kernels.mm(diag matrix, b) , performing 

4096 3 ≈ 6.9 × 10 10 multiply-accumulate operations. 

After (KernelOPT synthesized Triton kernel). The synthesis agent produces the following au-totuned kernel with 8 configurations exploring different tile shapes and warp counts: 

> @triton.autotune( configs=[

23 triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 1, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 1024}, num_warps=4), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 1, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 512}, num_warps=4), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 2, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 512}, num_warps=4), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 4, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 256}, num_warps=4), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 1, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 256}, num_warps=2), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 8, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 128}, num_warps=4), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 1, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 2048}, num_warps=8), 

triton .Config({’BLOCK_ROWS’: 2, ’BLOCK_COLS’: 1024}, num_warps=8), ], key=[’num_rows’, ’num_cols’], )@triton.jit 

def diag_matmul_kernel( a_ptr, b_ptr, out_ptr, num_rows, num_cols, stride_b_row, stride_b_col, stride_out_row, stride_out_col, BLOCK_ROWS: tl .constexpr, BLOCK_COLS: tl .constexpr, ): pid_row = tl .program_id(0) pid_col = tl .program_id(1) row_start = pid_row * BLOCK_ROWS col_start = pid_col * BLOCK_COLS row_offsets = row_start + tl .arange(0, BLOCK_ROWS) col_offsets = col_start + tl .arange(0, BLOCK_COLS) row_mask = row_offsets < num_rows col_mask = col_offsets < num_cols 

# Load diagonal elements A[row] 

a_vals = tl .load(a_ptr + row_offsets, mask=row_mask, other=0.0) 

# Load B block [BLOCK_ROWS, BLOCK_COLS] 

b_ptrs = (b_ptr + row_offsets[:, None] * stride_b_row + col_offsets[None, :] * stride_b_col) full_mask = row_mask[:, None] & col_mask[None, :] b_vals = tl .load(b_ptrs, mask=full_mask, other=0.0) 

# Scale each row by diagonal element: O(Nˆ2) 

out_vals = a_vals[:, None] * b_vals out_ptrs = (out_ptr + row_offsets[:, None] * stride_out_row + col_offsets[None, :] * stride_out_col) 

tl .store(out_ptrs, out_vals, mask=full_mask) 

Optimization pass. The subsequent optimization loop doubles the autotune search space from 8 to 16 configurations by adding num stages=2 and num stages=3 variants for software pipelin-ing, and applies tl.max contiguous /tl.multiple of memory alignment hints to enable vectorized loads: 

# Before (synthesis): 

row_offsets = row_start + tl .arange(0, BLOCK_ROWS) 

# After (optimization): 

row_offsets = tl .max_contiguous( 

tl .multiple_of( row_start + tl .arange(0, BLOCK_ROWS), BLOCK_ROWS), BLOCK_ROWS) 

The 88.63 × speedup is dominated by the synthesis step’s algorithmic change ( O(N 3) → O(N 2)), which eliminates the intermediate diagonal matrix allocation and reduces multiply-accumulate op-erations by a factor of N = 4096 . The optimization pass contributes a further incremental improve-ment from improved memory access patterns. G.2 L2 K ERNEL 018: A LGEBRAIC SIMPLIFICATION (33.11 ×)This kernel computes a 6-operation chain: Linear → Sum → Max → Mean → LogSumExp → Log-SumExp. The input is an (M, K ) matrix X, and the linear layer produces an (M, N ) intermediate via Y = XW ⊤ + b. Subsequent operations (sum, max, mean, LogSumExp) all reduce dimen-sion 1, collapsing each (M, N ) row to a scalar. KernelOPT’s synthesis agent discovers the algebraic identity: P

j

  P 

k Xik Wjk + bj

 = P

k Xik ·   P 

j Wjk 

 + P

j bj .

24 This reduces the computation from an (M, K ) × (K, N ) matrix multiply (cuBLAS GEMM) fol-lowed by per-row reductions on (M, N ), to a single (M, K )-dot-(K, ) vector operation. The precomputed column-sums wk = P 

> j

Wjk and bias sum bsum = P 

> j

bj reduce the work from 

O(M N K ) to O(M K ). Since subsequent operations (max, mean, two LogSumExp) each operate on a singleton dimension after the sum, they reduce to identity operations and are eliminated entirely.                                                                                            

> @triton.jit
> def fused_linear_sum_logsumexp_kernel( X_ptr, W_ptr, B_ptr, OUT_ptr, M, N, K, stride_xm, stride_xk, stride_wn, stride_wk, BLOCK_M: tl .constexpr, BLOCK_K: tl .constexpr, ):
> #W_ptr points to precomputed w_col_sum[k] =sum_j(W[j,k]) #B_ptr points to precomputed b_sum =sum_j(B[j])
> pid =tl .program_id(0) rows =pid * BLOCK_M +tl .arange(0, BLOCK_M) row_mask =rows <Macc =tl .zeros([BLOCK_M], dtype= tl .float32)
> for k_off in range (0, K, BLOCK_K): k_idx =k_off +tl .arange(0, BLOCK_K) k_mask =k_idx <Kw_col_sum =tl .load(W_ptr +k_idx, mask=k_mask, other=0.0) x_ptrs =(X_ptr +rows[:, None] *stride_xm +k_idx[None, :] * stride_xk) x_vals =tl .load(x_ptrs, mask=row_mask[:, None] &k_mask[None, :], other=0.0) acc += tl .sum (x_vals *w_col_sum[None, :], axis=1) b_sum =tl .load(B_ptr) acc += b_sum
> tl .store(OUT_ptr +rows, acc, mask=row_mask)

The wrapper function precomputes w col sum = weight.sum(dim=0) and b sum = bias.sum() once, then launches the kernel on each input batch. This eliminates the cuBLAS GEMM entirely and reduces the 6 separate Inductor kernel launches to a single fused Triton kernel with no intermediate HBM round-trips. G.3 L1 K ERNEL 007: M ATMUL AUTOTUNE OPTIMIZATION (2.89 ×)This kernel performs a standard dense matrix multiplication. The Inductor-generated Triton kernel uses fixed tile sizes ( BLOCK M=128 , BLOCK N=128 , BLOCK K=32 ) with 8 warps and 2 pipeline stages. KernelOPT’s optimization loop applies two key changes over 5 iterations: 1. FP16 dot-product accumulation: The operands are cast to FP16 before tl.dot , re-ducing register pressure from 184 to 125 registers per thread. This doubles theoretical occupancy from 12% to 24%. 2. Expanded autotune configurations: 16 configurations are added, varying BLOCK M ∈{32 , 64 , 128 }, BLOCK N ∈ { 64 , 128 , 256 }, num warps ∈ { 2, 4, 8}, and num stages ∈{1, 2, 3}. The winning configuration ( BLOCK M=64 , BLOCK N=128 , BLOCK K=32 ,

num warps=4 , num stages=3 ) achieves better L2 cache utilization by using smaller output tiles that fit more concurrently active CTAs. The combined effect is a 2.89 × speedup, with the occupancy improvement contributing approx-imately 2 × and the tile size optimization contributing the remaining 1.4 ×. Figure 6 shows the per-iteration optimization trajectory. 

## H HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION 

25 Figure 6: Optimization trajectory for L1-007 (matmul). Each point represents a candidate kernel evaluated during beam search. The planner identifies register pressure (184 regs, 12.4% occupancy) as the primary bottleneck from NCU metrics. Iteration 1, beam B applies FP16 dot-product accu-mulation, reducing registers to 125 and achieving a 3.27 × sub-kernel speedup (2.89 × E2E after model-level overhead).                     

> Component Specification
> GPU NVIDIA H200 SXM (Hopper, CC 9.0) SMs 132 HBM3 141 GB, 4.8 TB/s bandwidth L2 Cache 50 MB CUDA 12.8 PyTorch 2.7.0 Triton 3.3.0 NCU 2025.1.0 Python 3.10 / 3.11 LLM Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic) LLM API Google Cloud Vertex AI LLM timeout 900 s per call Beam width 4 chains Iterations 5 per kernel Plans per iter 4 (one per chain) Retries ( K)4 per plan E2E retries 3Perf gate γ1.03 (3% margin)

Table 11: Hardware, software, and hyperparameter configuration used for all experiments. 26