Title: Crystal-structure design by agentic AI in a language of motifs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.15900v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:45:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Crystal-structure design by agentic AI in a language of motifs 

Dinh-Khiet Le a, Minh-Quyet Ha a,∗, Hong-Phuc Vu-Dinh a, Takashi Miyake b, Hiori Kino c and Hieu-Chi Dam a,d ,∗

> a

Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan 

> b

Department of Physics, School of Science, Institute of Science Tokyo, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan 

> c

Research Center for Materials Informatics, Department of Advanced Data Science, The Institute of Statistical Mathematics, 10-3 Midori-cho, Tachikawa, Tokyo 190-8562, Japan 

> d

International Center for Synchrotron Radiation Innovation Smart (SRIS), Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8577, Japan 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Materials informatics Artificial intelligence Inverse design Rare-earth magnets 

A B S T R A C T 

Data-driven materials discovery interpolates more reliably than it extrapolates and seldom reaches new structure types. We present MatEvolve, an agentic-AI framework designing crystals, proposing each candidate with a stated rationale and testing it. The agent reasons in an interpretable language of motifs ,writing each crystal as a motif profile that describes the recurring geometric patterns—the motifs —composing it. The motif profile serves not merely as a description of a material but as the medium for material design: the agent edits the profile and constructs a crystal from the modified one, and the most promising candidates are validated by first-principles calculation. Applied to the design of rare-earth-lean permanent magnets, MatEvolve—built on the state-of-the-art language model Claude Fable 5 without fine-tuning—reaches new structural prototypes more than three times as often as generative models under an equal validation budget, at a comparable on-target-magnet rate. Beyond design, analysing the discovered crystals’ human-readable profiles reveals structure–property relationships. 

1. Introduction 

New materials have repeatedly redefined the limits of technology, from semiconductors underpinning modern com-puting to magnets and electrodes used in clean-energy systems. Their discovery, however, remains slow and costly: the space of candidate structures is effectively infinite, each candidate is expensive to synthesize and characterize, and even once a promising material is identified, translating it into practical applications can take a decade or more. To ac-celerate discovery, materials science has progressed through four established paradigms—empirical experiment, theory, simulation, and data-driven learning [1]—and a fifth is now emerging, in which AI agents drive discovery [2, 3, 4]. Setting the empirical baseline aside, we consider the com-putational paradigms in turn—theory and simulation, data-driven learning, and the emerging agent-based approach— asking what each contributes, where it falls short, and how its limitations motivate the next. First-principles theory and simulation reason deduc-tively; they predict how a given structure will behave from established physical theory. Density-functional theory (DFT) does so through a tractable approximation, computing a structure’s stability and properties by calculation alone [5]. Its distinctive strength is that it can assess a material that does not yet exist, quantitatively and with an accuracy deter-mined by the underlying approximation, thereby helping de-termine whether it is worth synthesizing and characterizing. As a route to discovery, however, it faces two limitations. First, each calculation is expensive, so even large-scale parallel computation covers only a negligible fraction of 

> ∗

Corresponding author  

> mq-ha@jaist.ac.jp

(M. Ha); dam@jaist.ac.jp (H. Dam) 

> ORCID

(s): 

an effectively infinite candidate space. Second, deduction evaluates candidates but does not generate them; that task falls to other means: enumeration by researchers, crystal-chemistry rules such as Pauling’s [6], or structure-search algorithms such as evolutionary search [7] and particle-swarm search [8]. Yet these approaches are also limited: enumeration and rule-based generation largely recombine known chemistry, while search remains constrained by the high computational cost, which can make calculations infeasible for complex structures. These limitations have motivated an inductive, data-driven paradigm. The data-driven paradigm learns statistical structure– property relationships from large, curated datasets, reason-ing by induction—generalizing from many examples [9]. These inductive methods take two forms. Surrogates pre-dict stability and properties orders of magnitude faster than DFT at inference, allowing far larger candidate sets to be screened [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. Generators , instead, learn a distribution over known structures and sample new candi-dates to supply that screen; some are conditioned on a target property [15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20]. The largest such studies have predicted large numbers of DFT-stable candidates [21]. Active learning and autonomous laboratories add a selection layer, ranking candidates using surrogate estimates such as predicted stability or uncertainty to determine which candi-dates to compute or synthesize next, and can automate the experiments themselves [22, 23]. These inductive methods share one central limitation: they interpolate well but extrapolate poorly. Within the range of known materials, they predict reliably; however, their accuracy decreases beyond it [24]—and that is where gen-uinely new materials lie. A secondary trade-off concerns interpretability: the most accurate surrogates are often the least transparent, whereas interpretable descriptors such as 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 19 arXiv:2608.15900v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 16 Aug 2026 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs Dy ₂Fe 17 C

> C12/m1
> mp-1225413 Nd ₂Fe 14 B
> P4_2/mnm
> mp-5182

Parents structures Offspring structures Motif profiles    

> Nd 2Fe 14 B (mp-5182)
> Motif 1: (Fe Frank–Kasper scaffold) A [TM scaffold] of [magnetic TM] Fe and [heavy RE stron g spin-orbit] Nd in [Frank-Kasper cage] coordination with [ high CN], [pure TM shell], [3D] [percolating]. Fe atoms for m a fully connected framework with dense near-neighbor s eparations throughout the 3D volume. Motif 2: (B trigonal prism) A [TM-X coordination] of [light metalloid] B, [magnetic T M] Fe, and [heavy RE strong spin-orbit] Nd in [prismatic] coordination with [medium CN] 6, [pure TM shell] of 6 Fe, [3D] [percolating]. B-centered prisms are [in-plane] and stit ch directly into the Fe exchange framework to rigidify the l attice. Motif 3: (alternating layers) A [layer arrangement] of [heavy RE strong spin-orbit] Nd, [ light metalloid] B, and [magnetic TM] Fe in [layer arrange ment] coordination with [high CN], [mixed TM+X shell], [ 3D] [percolating]. The structure consists of [alternating lay ers] of Nd/B-rich and Fe-rich slabs stacked along the c-axi s. Motif 4: (Nd cage) A [RE cage] of [RE] Nd in [Frank–Kasper-type polyhedral] coordination with [very high CN] ≈19–20, [mixed TM+X shell] of ~16–17 Fe with B and Nd in-plane neighbors, a lo cal cage embedded in the [3D] [percolating] framework. Th e Nd atoms sit in the basal planes (z = 0, ½), each cage sh aring faces with the Fe slabs above and below. Nd–Fe bon ds: typical regime; Nd–B contacts: long regime.

## MatEvolve framework 

> Sm ₂Fe 17 C
> P-3m1
> Dy ₂Fe 17 B
> R-3m

Figure 1: Overview of MatEvolve. An interpretable, agent-based framework for crystal-structure design built on the motif profile —a human-readable text representation that describes a crystal in terms of the recurring geometric motifs from which it is constructed. One turn of the loop consists of three stages. Structure translate : an agent writes a parent structure as its motif profile. Structure design : an agent edits the parent’s profile—recombining and mutating motifs—to propose new candidate structures with a stated rationale, which a generator then realizes. Evaluation : an uncertainty-aware recommender prioritizes candidates for first-principles validation, which assesses and optimizes each candidate; every validated candidate returns to the pool from which the next parents are drawn. 

symbolic regression [25] can recover physical insight at some cost in accuracy. The catch is what counts as new . A generator samples from a distribution fitted to known struc-tures, so a compound merely absent from current databases is readily obtained; a genuinely new prototype —an arrange-ment unlike those in the training set—tends to lie in the low-probability tail of that distribution and is reached only rarely [26]. Moreover, a likely draw provides little rationale for why it should meet the target property. Such methods generate readily within the known space but less often reach a new, better prototype—a gap that the next paradigm may help close. The emerging agent-based approach addresses that task. At its centre is an agent —a large language model directed not by a task-specific dataset but by a goal stated in words [2, 27]. It reasons abductively, drawing on the human knowl-edge absorbed during training to propose a plausible can-didate and a reason for it, which a subsequent test then confirms or refutes. Such agents already operate at research scale: language-model agents have autonomously identified real software vulnerabilities, agent-proposed scientific hy-potheses have been confirmed in the laboratory [28, 29], and agent systems answer materials queries by coordinating search, prediction, and generation tools [30]. This approach is widely argued to mark an emerging fifth paradigm [3, 4]; the agent is itself trained on data, but a single agent can serve many goals, whereas the data-driven paradigm fits a new model to each task. Because the agent verbalizes its reasoning, it and the scientist share a medium through which the exchange can run in both directions: a scientist can shape the agent’s proposals, and the agent makes its reasoning transparent in return. This reciprocity is something that one-directional couplings of human knowledge to a model, such as physics-informed learning [31], cannot readily offer. In materials design, the goal is to identify a compound that is both stable and exhibits a target property. At a fixed composition, both are governed largely by how its atoms are arranged—the crystal’s geometry. Geometry is something an agent can handle in words: a language model can solve an Olympiad geometry problem from its written statement, proposing the constructions required by its proof [32]. A crystal can be translated into the same medium [33]: as the set of local motifs from which it is built, its motif profile .From this text, an agent proposes edits—recombining and mutating parent motifs, as in evolutionary search, but guided by a stated, target-directed reason rather than the fixed, target-blind operators of structure-search methods such as USPEX [7] and CALYPSO [8]. Because the agent draws on knowledge far broader than any property-labelled dataset, its edits need not remain within the distribution defined by that dataset—the interpolation limit at which data-driven generators stall [34]. Prior work has established each side of this crystal– text translation. Automated description turns a crystal into text: Robocrystallographer writes a structure as prose that reports its space group and prototype [35]. Text-conditioned generation turns a specification back into a crystal: Crys-Text produces a structure from its composition and sym-metry [36]. Textual descriptions further act as machine-readable representations for property prediction [37, 38], with the choice of representation itself shaping model perfor-mance [39]. Agentic loops have been demonstrated as well: 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

FunSearch evolves computer programs [40], LLMatDesign and MatAgent iterate over chemical compositions [41, 42], and MatLLMSearch evolves raw crystal encodings [43]. To-gether, these studies put every ingredient in place: a crystal can be written as text, text can be rebuilt into a crystal, and an agent can steer an iterative search. They point to a natural next step—a framework in which text itself becomes the medium of materials design. Here we present MatEvolve, a framework whose design medium is a language of motifs : a crystal is described as a 

motif profile , an agent edits the profile, and a new crystal is built from the edited profile. The profile is a human-readable text that records the recurring geometric patterns— the motifs —from which the crystal is built. This describe– edit–build cycle repeats as an evolutionary search: parent profiles are recombined or mutated with a stated rationale, an evidence-based recommender decides where the limited first-principles budget is spent, and each validated candidate joins the pool from which the next generation’s parents are drawn. A profile names the building blocks themselves— withholding the coordinates, lattice parameters, space group, and structure-type label that a crystallographic description would report—yet it is accepted only if a crystal containing its motifs can be built and, when the profile is translated from a known crystal, only if that crystal is recovered in a round-trip test. The agent thus edits a crystal’s architecture, not its coordinates. 

2. Results 

2.1. Framework overview 

MatEvolve is an agent-based framework for materials 

design through evolutionary search. Rather than screening a fixed or sampled candidate pool, it evolves new crystals over an interpretable text representation—the motif profile —across successive generations and validates its designs from first principles. It is designed to be retargetable, with a new objective set by restating it rather than by re-engineering the pipeline. Each generation runs as an ordered pipeline (Fig. 1): Structure Translate writes each parent crystal as its motif profile; Structure Design edits those parent profiles and generates offspring structures; an evidence-based rec-ommender system (ERS) ranks the offspring; and density-functional theory (DFT) validates the top-ranked candidates, which then join the population from which the next gener-ation’s parents are drawn. Structure Translate and Structure Design both share two basis agents that translate between a crystal and text in opposite directions—CIF2Text, which reads a structure and writes its profile, and Text2CIF, which generates a structure from a profile. The remainder of this section describes the design of each stage; implementation details are deferred to the Methods. At the framework’s core is the motif profile itself. A crystal is written as a set of distinct structural motifs from which it is built, together with its composition and no atomic coordinates, lattice parameters, space-group symbol, or structure-type label. A motif is a recurring structural build-ing block, ranging from a local coordination environment— a polyhedron, cage, or bonded cluster—to an extended framework such as a net or layer, each named in a controlled natural-language vocabulary according to its constituent species, geometry, and bond-length regime (Supplementary Information S1). A rare-earth–iron compound, for example, might be profiled as a samarium-centred high-coordination (Frank–Kasper-type) cage, an extended iron framework with short Fe–Fe contacts, and an interstitial light-element site. By naming the building blocks themselves rather than encoding coordinates, the profile is human-interpretable and directly editable—a materials scientist can read, edit, and compare it motif by motif—unlike a learned latent vector or a raw coordinate list. To be admissible, a profile must retain sufficient information to specify the crystal: we require that the structure can be regenerated from it, satisfying a 

bidirectional-consistency criterion enforced by the process described next. 

Structure Translate turns a crystal into an admissible motif profile, and this is where bidirectional consistency— the round-trip test—is enforced (Fig. 2 a). Given a structure 

𝑆 , CIF2Text writes a candidate profile 𝑇 ; Text2CIF then reconstructs a structure 𝑆 ′ from 𝑇 alone, and 𝑇 is accepted only if 𝑆 ′ matches 𝑆 according to the structure-match crite-rion described in Methods 2. Because Text2CIF works from the profile, the agreement reflects the information carried by 

𝑇 ; a profile from which no matching structure can be re-covered is revised and, if necessary, rejected. Admissibility requires only that a faithful realization be recoverable, not that the profile uniquely determines a structure. CIF2Text and Text2CIF extend the text representation of crystals that we introduced previously [33]; their construction is given in Supplementary Information S1, and the accept-or-revise loop is described in Methods 2. 

Structure Design turns parent profiles into offspring structures (Fig. 2 b). A design agent reads the profiles of one or two parents—drawn from the pool according to the design objective—and, reasoning over their motifs, proposes an offspring profile by recombining or mutating them (an evolutionary operator; Supplementary Information S3) to improve a target property. Text2CIF then generates a can-didate structure from that offspring profile (Methods 3). To ensure that the design is faithfully realized, the generated structure is checked for the designed motifs and regenerated from the profile until those motifs are present. Each generation proposes more candidates than can be afforded by first-principles validation, so the ERS [44, 34] ranks them beforehand. It scores a candidate not from its individual motifs but from its motif groups —families of related motifs obtained by clustering them across the dataset (Methods 4). Through Dempster–Shafer evidence theory [45, 46], it accumulates evidence of how reliably those groups and their combinations have been associated with the design target across the labelled structures. Candi-dates are ranked by this evidence so that costly validation is focused on the most promising ones, and DFT then   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 19

MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs a 

> Yes No Does T’ cover T? Yes No
> Structure S’
> CIF2Text
> Motif profile T’
> Text2CIF CIF2Text
> Motif profile T Structure S Motif profile T
> Does S’ match S?

# Structure Translation 

b Structure Design    

> Yes No Does T’ Offspring cover T Offspring ?
> Structure S’
> EvoOperator
> Motif profile T’ Offspring
> Text2CIF CIF2Text
> Motif profile T Offspring Motif profiles S Parents
> Structure fine-tuning AI reasoning Python tools
> Structure S Offspring

Figure 2: Structure Translation and Structure Design loops. Blue boxes denote AI-reasoning (language-model) agents; green shapes represent deterministic Python tools. (a) Structure Translation converts a crystal into a validated motif profile, enforcing bidirectional consistency: the profile is accepted only if a structure rebuilt from it reproduces the original, in terms of both its motifs and geometry. (b) Structure Design edits parent profiles into new offspring structures through the evolutionary operator, retaining only candidates that realize the designed motifs. 

relaxes and evaluates each selected candidate. The evidence model and the first-principles validation protocol are given in Methods 5 and 6. 

2.2. Experimental design and settings 

We evaluated MatEvolve in three experiments: whether the motif profile faithfully represented a crystal (Experi-ment 1); whether editing profiles yielded stable, novel, on-target magnets that held up against generative models under an equal validation budget (Experiment 2); and how much of that performance came from the recommender that selects candidates for validation (Experiment 3). All agents ran on a single frozen commercial language model (Claude Fable 5, decoding temperature 0.5; Supplementary Information S1), identical across the experiments. 

Datasets Two datasets underpinned the experiments: one seeded the search, the other defined novelty. • Initial population, seed — the 957 magnetic struc-tures from which the search started, curated from the Materials Project [5] to cover permanent-magnet and magnetic-intermetallic families: compounds pair-ing a rare-earth element (Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Y) with a transition metal (Fe, Co, Mn, Ni), with total magnetization above 10 𝜇 𝐵 per for-mula unit, energy above the convex hull of at most 

0.2 eV/atom, and converged DFT energies (tolerance below 10 −5 eV/atom). It comprised 241 thermody-namically stable ( 𝐸 hull = 0) and 716 metastable phases; by magnetic ordering, it included 283 ferro-magnetic and 624 ferrimagnetic structures, with the remaining 50 unresolved in the source data. Com-positions ranged from binary to quinary with 5–100 atoms per cell, including ThMn 12 -type intermetallics, RECo 5 compounds, RE 2TM 14 B magnets, Heusler al-loys, and perovskite oxides. • Novelty reference, ref — the set against which novelty was judged: the entire Materials Project [5] to-gether with the ∼5 million structures in the Alexandria database [47]. A candidate was counted as novel only if it matched nothing in ref , which included the seed, so rediscovering a seed structure earned no credit. 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

Experiment 1: reconstruction fidelity We put each of the 

957 seed structures through a full Structure Translate round (Methods 2): CIF2Text wrote a profile from the structure without its coordinates, Text2CIF rebuilt a structure from that profile alone, and the profile was revised until the rebuilt structure was admissible. We then matched each accepted reconstruction against its DFT-relaxed Materials Project ref-erence with pymatgen’s StructureMatcher , scoring the recon-struction as generated, without DFT relaxation. We used the 

standard tolerance ( ltol 0.3, stol 0.5, angle_tol 10 ◦) under which generative models report reconstruction rates. 

Experiment 2: design benchmark We ran the full loop for three generations. Each generation drew two parents from the accumulated pool of seed and validated structures—one from the most stable members, one from the most magne-tized (Methods 1)—and edited their profiles with Structure Design. An offspring entered the run only if it passed the realization gate, the check that the generated crystal contains its designed motifs (Methods 3). Each generation produced 200 such proposals, of which the ERS selected 100 for DFT validation; the run length and both budgets were fixed in advance by the available DFT resources. Three generations therefore gave a proposal pool of 600 and a benchmark set of 300 validated candidates, matching each baseline’s budget. The remaining 300 proposals were set aside, unvalidated during the run, for Experiment 3. We compared motif editing against two recent gener-ative models: MatterGen [17], in both its magnetization-conditioned and unconditioned (Materials Project + Alexan-dria) forms, and the unconditioned Chemeleon2 [48]. Every method received the same budget of 300 DFT-validated candidates, drawn from a disclosed proposal pool by its own ranking procedure. Each baseline generated 1,000 candi-dates by its native sampling procedure and ranked them with CHGNet, on both formation energy and predicted magnetic moment; its top 300 were validated. MatEvolve’s 200 pro-posals per generation were ranked by the ERS on stability (Methods 5), the top 100 of each being validated, giving 300 in all. 

Experiment 3: contribution of the recommender The benchmark compares whole pipelines, so its outcome could arise either from what the LLM-based evolutionary operator proposes or from what the ERS selects for validation. To separate the second of these, we relaxed the 300 proposals the ERS had not selected—after the run had completed, and excluded from the benchmark’s hull reference—so that the selected and unselected halves of the same pool could be compared on the three rates defined below. 

Evaluation metrics Experiments 2 and 3 were evaluated identically. Every validated candidate was scored on three nested rates based on the stable–unique–novel (S.U.N.) criterion of the structure-generation literature (Supplemen-tary Information S4): the base S.U.N. rate, whose sta-bility criterion—energy above the convex hull at most 

0.1 eV/atom—is tighter than the seed’s 0.2 eV/atom cura-tion threshold; the property-targeted rate S.U.N.  , counting S.U.N. structures with 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 > 1 T; and the new-prototype rate S.U.N. proto  

> 

. The 1 T threshold marks a saturation magnetization of permanent-magnet relevance (Nd 2Fe 14 Breaches ≈1 .6 T). All rates were computed identically for every method and arm, with uniqueness, novelty, and pro-totype status assessed against ref . Finally, each discovered structure was fingerprinted by the AFLOW prototype label of its periodic-block-collapsed structure—each element re-placed by its periodic-table block (Supplementary Informa-tion S4)—classified as a new prototype or a substitution on a known lattice, and checked for alignment with established permanent-magnet chemistry as a test of physical plausibil-ity. 

2.3. Structure reconstruction fidelity 

We first measured how faithfully a motif profile de-scribes its crystal. The profile withholds coordinates, lattice parameters, space group, and structure-type label, so the test is whether what remains suffices to rebuild the structure. We applied Structure Translate to the 957 structures of seed to obtain their motif profiles, then rebuilt a structure from each. Of these reconstructions, 57% matched their originals at the tolerances conventionally used to evaluate deep-learning structure generators ( ltol 0.3, stol 0.5, angle_tol 10 ◦). Those generators report match rates of roughly 34% to 64% 

under the same settings on MP-20, a standard benchmark of Materials Project structures with at most twenty atoms per cell [15, 16, 18]; the lower end is set by autoencoder recon-struction, the task closest to ours [15]. The rate reported here sits within that range, obtained on larger cells and from a representation that carries no lattice information at all. Figure 3a shows eight reconstructions beside their orig-inals, spanning the range of outcomes. Four were rebuilt al-most exactly: the ThMn 12 -type Gd(Al 2Fe) 4 (mp-1104719), the filled skutterudite Pr(FeSb 3)4 (mp-1188509), Tb 6FeBi 2

(mp-1079285) and the layered Ce 5(FeB 3)2 (mp-1105171), at 0.013 , 0.032 , 0.043 and 0.056 Å. The boride DyFeB 4

(mp-1191987) was displaced further, by 0.174 Å, yet repro-duced the boron network of its original. The three largest departures—Gd 2Fe 12 P7 (mp-1191833), the 2:17-type hy-dride Tb 2Fe 17 H3 (mp-1208578) and SmEr 3Fe 34 (mp-1219139)— show what failure looks like here: at 0.75 , 0.98 and 1.13 Åthe atoms sit visibly off their reference positions, yet each reconstruction still assembles the same motifs as its original. A motif profile names the motifs a crystal contains, how they are arranged, and the bond-length regime of each—but no numerical bond length, coordinate or lattice parameter. Text2CIF must therefore place the atoms, and its placement need not match the original. Scoring was conservative: re-constructions were taken as Text2CIF emitted them, without any first-principles relaxation, while the references are DFT-relaxed, so part of every displacement is the ordinary gap between an unrelaxed and a relaxed geometry. Over the matched reconstructions the median RMSD was 0.02 Å and the mean 0.17 Å (Fig. 3b). However, such displacement   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 19

MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs Gd(Al 2Fe) 4 (mp-1104719)     

> RMSD = 0.013 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=0.002
> Ce 5(FeB 3)2(mp-1105171)
> RMSD = 0.056 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=0.01
> DyFeB 4(mp-1191987)
> RMSD = 0.174 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=0.208
> Pr(FeSb 3)4(mp-1188509)
> RMSD = 0.032 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=0.007
> Gd 2Fe 12 P7(mp-1191833)
> RMSD = 0.75 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=4.17

## a   

> Mean of CShM: 0.96
> Mean of RMSD: 0.17 ( 𝐴̇ )
> Tb 6FeBi 2(mp-1079285)
> RMSD = 0.043 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=0.014
> RMSD = 0.98 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=5.6
> Tb 2Fe 17 H3(mp-1208578)
> RMSD = 1.13 ( 𝐴̇ ); CShM=7.65
> SmEr 3Fe 34 (mp-1219139)

## cb

Figure 3: Reconstruction fidelity of the motif profile (round-trip Structure Translate: CIF2Text →Text2CIF). (a) Eight representative reconstructions spanning the range of outcomes. In each pair the left structure is the original Materials Project reference and the right structure is the one regenerated by Text2CIF from the motif profile; RMSD is the root-mean-square displacement between matched atomic positions in Ångstroms, and CShM the dimensionless continuous shape measure of the reconstruction relative to the original [49, 50]. (b) Distribution of RMSD and (c) of CShM, in each case over the matched reconstructions. 

measures what the profile leaves free rather than what it encodes. The profile is designed to preserve shape, so we mea-sured shape correspondence directly. The continuous shape measure (CShM) scores the deviation of one structure from another after optimal superposition, on a scale from 0, for an identical match, to 100 (Methods 2). Unlike the RMSD, the superposition also optimizes the overall scale, so the measure reports the correspondence of shape rather than the numerical agreement of interatomic distances. Coordination chemistry reads it in bands: essentially ideal below about 0.1,slightly distorted up to 3, notably distorted from 3 to 7.5,and beyond 7.5 a breakdown of the target geometry [49, 51, 52, 53]. Those bands were calibrated on single coordination polyhedra, so we use them to describe the distribution rather than to judge it. Across the matched reconstructions, 79% 

fell in the essentially ideal band and a further 10% in the slightly distorted band; 7% showed notable distortion and 

4% lay beyond the breakdown boundary. The median of the CShM was 0.003 and the mean 0.96 (Fig. 3c), the mean set by that tail. The eight examples of Fig. 3a place the bands on real structures: 0.002 –0.014 for the four rebuilt almost exactly, 0.21 for the one displaced by about 0.2 Å, and 4.17 ,

5.60 and 7.65 for the three largest departures. The last passed the geometric match yet sits at the breakdown boundary, and still assembles the same motifs as its original—a whole unit cell must depart much further than a coordination sphere to reach the same band. Even the means over all 957 reconstructions— 0.51 Åfor the RMSD and 4.60 for the CShM—stay within no-table distortion, short of the breakdown boundary. Across the reconstructions that matched, the profile preserved the shape of the original: nearly nine in ten departed no further than slight distortion, and most were indistinguishable from their references. What a profile constrains only loosely is where the atoms sit—by design, since it is a representation rather than a coordinate list. Editing one therefore specifies an offspring’s building blocks rather than its coordinates, and the placement is settled downstream by first-principles relaxation. 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

Table 1 Benchmark of MatEvolve against generative models on magnetic-material design. Each method contributes 300 DFT-validated candidates, drawn from its own proposal pool by its own ranking procedure (baselines: top 300 of 1,000 ranked with CHGNet on formation energy and predicted magnetic moment; MatEvolve: top 100 of 200 per generation by the ERS). Three rates are reported (in %): the stable–unique–novel (S.U.N.) rate; the property-targeted rate (S.U.N.  , S.U.N. structures reaching 

𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 > 1 T); and the new-prototype property-targeted rate (S.U.N. proto  

> 

, property-targeted S.U.N. structures that additionally realize a structural prototype absent from the reference databases). Bold marks the highest rate in each column. All rates are conditional on each method’s own ranking—its intended mode of use; ranking method, sequential feedback, seed chemistry prior, and input representation are not separately controlled. 

Method S.U.N. Property-targeted S.U.N. ( ) New-proto. S.U.N. ( )

This work 25% 24% 21% 

Chemeleon2, MP+Alexandria (unconditioned) 30% 1% 1% MatterGen, MP+Alexandria (unconditioned) 40% 0% 0% MatterGen, magnetization-conditioned 22% 20% 6%     

> Note: Both novelty criteria are applied identically to every method. S.U.N. novelty is decided by structure matching against all Materials Project and Alexandria entries (pymatgen StructureMatcher , database de-duplication tolerances). The new-prototype fraction applies the stricter test: each relaxed structure is assigned an AFLOW prototype label [54, 55] from its periodic-block–collapsed (s/p/d/f) structure and tested against the labels of all such entries, using the same procedure and symmetry tolerance.

2.4. Benchmarking and discovery of new stable magnets 

We benchmarked motif editing head-to-head against two recent generative models, MatterGen [17] and Chemeleon2 [48], under the protocol of Section 2.2—300 DFT-validated can-didates per method— scored on the three nested rates defined there—the S.U.N. rate, the property-targeted (mag-netic) rate S.U.N.  , and the new-prototype property-targeted rate S.U.N. proto  

> 

—with novelty and prototype status assessed against ref = MP + Alexandria (Table 1). The rank-ing criteria—the ERS score for MatEvolve and CHGNet-predicted formation energy and magnetic moment for the baselines—were used only to select candidates for vali-dation; every reported rate, including the 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 > 1 Ttarget, was determined from each candidate’s DFT-relaxed structure. Prototype status was determined using an AFLOW prototype label [54, 55] Λ computed for the periodic-block-collapsed (s/p/d/f) structure and matched against the labels of all Materials Project and Alexandria entries (Supplemen-tary Information S4): a candidate counted as a new prototype only when its label appeared nowhere in the reference, so that a substitution on a known lattice shared its host’s label and was not counted. The same Λ rule was applied identically to every method, making the new-prototype column of Table 1 directly comparable across generators. The three tiers formed a ladder of increasing stringency, and the methods separated only at its top (Table 1). On the base S.U.N. tier, unconditioned MatterGen led, 40% against MatEvolve’s 25% —as expected of a model optimized for stability alone, so a high base rate says little about magnet design. Adding the magnetization requirement collapsed the unconditioned models to 0% and 1% but left MatEvolve and the conditioned model close, at 24% and 20% : this tier does not distinguish them. Adding the new-prototype requirement did: 21% against 6% . The unconditioned models’ near-zero property rates reflect their training rather than their method: neither was directed at magnetization, and a generator re-trained on magnetic compounds would likely close that gap. The new-prototype gap is different in kind. A generative model samples from a distribution fitted to known crystals, so it reproduces prototype families it has already seen; a prototype absent from that training set lies outside what it samples. That is the distinction we draw: MatEvolve was redirected to this objective without retraining any of its agents, and still reached new prototypes more than three times as often as a purpose-trained model on an equal validation budget. To separate the ERS’s contribution from the operator’s, we relaxed the 300 proposals the ERS had not selected (Section 2.2) and scored them on the same three tiers. Selection by the ERS raised every rate— 25% against 18% 

on the base tier, 24% against 14% on the property tier, and 

21% against 8% on new prototypes (Table S2)—and raised it most on the tier where the framework’s advantage lies, by a factor of 2.6. The ERS does not create that advantage on its own: across the full 600-proposal pool, with no selection applied, the new-prototype rate was 14% against the con-ditioned baseline’s 6% , so the advantage is already present in what the agent proposes. The two halves are not fully independent, since the parents of generations two and three were drawn from candidates the ERS had already prioritized; the unselected half therefore inherits part of that benefit, and the gap understates what selection contributes overall. Figure 4a shows the saturation magnetization and hull distance of every validated candidate from each method, irrespective of novelty. The unconditioned baselines are essentially non-magnetic throughout. The magnetization-conditioned baseline reaches the highest saturation magne-tizations in the study, up to about 2.4 T within 0.07 eV/atom of the hull, while MatEvolve’s candidates spread across the full hull range from about 1.0 to 2.2 T, much of it above the saturation magnetization of Nd 2Fe 14 B. Novelty is where the two separate: nearly nine in ten of MatEvolve’s on-target candidates realize a prototype absent from the reference, against fewer than one in three of the conditioned baseline’s (Table 1). MatEvolve’s candidates are also concentrated at 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs a                      

> Sm₂Fe₁₅Al₂C
> P-3m1 Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.34 T Tb₂Fe₅Co₁₂
> P6₃/mmc
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.42 T Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> GdCu₂Co₃
> P6/mmm
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.51 T Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> GdFe₁₂C
> I4/mmm
> μ₀M ₛ= 2.22 T Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> GdFe₁₁Si
> C2/m
> μ₀M ₛ= 2.05 T Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> SmFe₄Co₈
> I4/mmm
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.62 T Ehull = 0 eV/atom
> Sm₂Fe 17 C
> P-3m1
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.73 T Ehull = 0.02 eV/atom
> Sm₂Fe 13 AlB
> P4_2/mnm
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.45 T Ehull = 0.02 eV/atom
> SmFe 10 Co 2
> P4/nmm
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.87 T Ehull = 0.01 eV/atom
> Sm₂Fe 14 Co 3
> R-3m
> μ₀M ₛ= 1.78 T Ehull = 0.02 eV/atom
> MatEvolve MatterGen (Magnetic-density) MatterGen (MP+Alex) Chemeleon2 (MP+Alex)

bc

> 𝒟 !""#

Figure 4: Stability and magnetization of the MatEvolve-generated magnets and the baseline sets. (a) Saturation magnetization 

𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 versus energy above the convex hull for each method’s 300 DFT-validated candidates: MatEvolve (blue), the seed set 

seed (grey), and the generative baselines—unconditioned MatterGen (red), magnetization-conditioned MatterGen (orange), and Chemeleon2 (green)—; the horizontal dashed line marks the saturation magnetization of Nd 2Fe 14 B. (b) The six on-hull property-targeted S.U.N. structures ( 𝐸 hull = 0 , 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 > 1 T), each absent from the Materials Project and Alexandria; each panel reports the formula, space group, and 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 . (c) Four representative new-prototype property-targeted S.U.N. structures (S.U.N. proto  

> 

;metastable, 0 < 𝐸 hull ≤ 0.1 eV/atom), each realizing a prototype absent from both databases. 

low rare-earth-to-transition-metal ratios, reaching compet-itive magnetization on markedly less rare earth—the ob-jective of contemporary low-rare-earth permanent-magnet research. We then examined what the framework had found among its 300 validated candidates, which span the rare-earth– transition-metal (RE–TM) families. Throughout, “discov-ery” denotes computational discovery: structures estab-lished by DFT to be thermodynamically stable or metastable and to meet the saturation-magnetization target. Magne-tocrystalline anisotropy, Curie temperature and experimen-tal synthesis lie outside the present scope, so “magnet” here refers to saturation magnetization rather than to a fully qualified permanent-magnet material. Of the 300 validated candidates, 74 were stable or metastable. Every one proved unique and novel against 

ref —de-duplication removed none—and six lay on the convex hull ( 𝐸 hull = 0 ). All six exceed 1 T (Fig. 4b) and populate the principal prototype families of rare-earth per-manent magnets—ThMn 12 -type R(Fe,Co) 12 , CaCu 5-type RCo 5, and Th 2Zn 17 /Th 2Ni 17 -type R 2(Fe,Co) 17 —with the carbon interstitials and the Co, Cu, Si and Al substitu-tions characteristic of them. That the framework recovers these cornerstone families without family-specific training supports the physical plausibility of the run. The new-to-reference prototypes appear instead among the metastable discoveries: of the 72 property-targeted hits, 63 realize a prototype absent from both databases and only 9 are new chemistries on known lattices. All four representatives in Fig. 4c realize a prototype absent from the reference. For three, the composition itself is new; the fourth, Sm 2Fe 17 C, occurs in the databases at the same composition but in a different skeleton, and is the case we examine next. Sm 2Fe 17 C occurs in two different skeletons. The cat-alogued entry mp-1219267 adopts the monoclinic 𝐶 2∕ 𝑚 

skeleton, sits 0.28 eV/atom above the hull and reaches 

0.064 T; the generated structure adopts the trigonal 𝑃̄ 3𝑚 1

skeleton at essentially the same density, sits 0.02 eV/atom above the hull and reaches 1.73 T. The two differ in layer stacking: the generated structure is an intergrowth in which Sm 2Fe 17 layers alternate with a carbon-filled Sm 2Fe 17 C3

layer—the carbon analogue of the Sm 2Fe 17 N3 interstitial 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

magnet [56]—whereas the monoclinic entry is a sheared variant in which that ordering is lost. Sm 2Fe 17 C𝑥 carbides are experimentally established [57], so what distinguishes the two entries is not their chemistry but the arrangement of that carbon. The joint gain in stability and magnetization plausibly follows from the ordering, although one matched case cannot separate it from the two structures’ different converged magnetic states. No new motif appears: the novelty lies in combining the motifs of Sm 2Fe 17 with those of Sm 2Fe 17 C3, each known on its own. Taken together, the benchmark and these examples show that editing motif profiles produces stable, magnetic crystals at a rate comparable to a purpose-trained generator, and reaches new prototypes far more often, with the recom-mender contributing a substantial part of that advantage. What the run does not settle is where the structural novelty itself resides: whether the other new prototypes are, as Sm 2Fe 17 C is, new combinations of familiar building blocks rather than new blocks. We take that up next. 

2.5. Structural insights into novelty and stability through motif analysis 

The interpretable motif profile allows us to return to the question Sm 2Fe 17 C posed and to characterize the dis-coveries, not merely count them: for the structures the run produced—all 600, novel or not—we can ask where the novelty of the new prototypes resides and what underlies their stability. Both questions turn on the local motifs from which the structures are built, so we first establish a common vocabulary of geometric groups from the seed alone. A consensus procedure—five language-model voters casting categorical votes, with a deterministic routine performing all merging, splitting, and counting, so that the number of groups is discovered rather than fixed (Methods 4)— partitions the motifs of the seed structures into 17 groups. Each motif in the generated structures is then assigned, using the same categorical voting procedure, to one of these groups or, if it matches none, left unassigned. This shared labelling allows the recommender to score each candidate against the stability statistics derived from the seed. Across the study, the 10,096 motifs from all 1,557 structures were distributed across the 17 groups, each of which was summarized as a word cloud in Fig. 5a by its most representative motif keywords (construction detailed in Supplementary Information S6). The groups were de-fined along the axes used by a crystal chemist—unit class, coordination geometry and coordination-number band— rather than in a latent coordinate. Most groups represented a specific geometry, spanning much of the standard vo-cabulary of intermetallic chemistry—tetrahedral, octahedral and dimer units; triangular-planar and square-planar frame-works; chain, square-net, kagome, honeycomb, hexagonal and ring motifs; and icosahedral, Frank–Kasper, prismatic and generic cages. The emergence of such a small, recognis-able set was not an artefact of clustering: intermetallic co-ordination is known to collapse onto approximately twenty recurring environments—with the icosahedron and 𝑍 12 –

𝑍 16 Frank–Kasper cages among the most common [58, 59, 60, 61]—which our clustering recovered. Every group was broadly compatible with stability: across all 17 groups, the stable-or-metastable fraction fell within a similar range ( 57 –70% ; Fig. 5b), so no single geometry was uniquely stabilizing or destabilizing. Whether a structure was stable therefore depended more on how its groups combined than on which groups it contained, which we analysed further below. Saturation magnetization, by contrast, separated the groups (Fig. 5c): the highest values belonged to the kagome layer, the dimer/dumbbell unit, the Frank–Kasper cage and the honeycomb layer, while the dense metallic frameworks and the hexagonal layer also averaged above the 1 T target. These motifs marked iron-rich environments, and the ordering tracked iron content: the transition-metal nets and dense metallic frameworks carried the itinerant 3𝑑 moment [62, 63], while the dimer/dumbbell and Frank–Kasper-cage groups showed high values because they marked iron-rich rare-earth–iron intermetallics—the cage housing the rare-earth atom that supplies the 4𝑓 anisotropy [56], with the moment coming from the surrounding iron framework. Recovering this mag-netically meaningful vocabulary from geometry alone made the partition interpretable. The seed’s vocabulary accounted for the great majority of the motifs in the generated structures. Assigning each gen-erated motif to one of the 17 seed groups—using the same categorical vote, which could also return none —mapped most of them onto an existing group, so that every group was used by both the seed and the generated set (Fig. 5d). A small fraction were instead returned unassigned—local geometries with no counterpart among the seed’s groups—and were set aside from the combinatorial analysis below. The small size of this tail was important: MatEvolve’s structural novelty was predominantly combinatorial, arising far more from new arrangements of the shared vocabulary than from new building blocks, as the next paragraphs quantified. We extended this analysis to the whole-structure level by representing each structure as the set of motif groups to which its motifs were assigned. Fig. 6a maps the 1,557 structures under this motif-group representation—structures sharing groups, or mutually substitutable ones [44, 64], were placed close together (details of the map construction are given in Supplementary Information S5). The seed struc-tures formed two dense regions (grey kernel-density con-tours), and the generated structures largely gathered along the border between them rather than in a region isolated from the seed. A structure combining groups from both regions was placed between them, so this bridging position reflected new combinations of the existing groups. Since almost every generated motif still mapped onto a seed group rather than remaining unassigned, the generated structures recombined existing groups rather than introducing new ones. Fig. 6b quantified this pattern by classifying the binary, ternary and quaternary combinations of the 17 groups—the sets of two, three and four groups—according to whether   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 19

MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs Stable/Metastable Unstable 

ab         

> 𝒟 !""# 𝒟 $%&'()*("
> Group 1: Tetrahedral unit, 0D-to-3D Group 5: Ring coordination motif Group 9: Dimer/dumbbell unit Group 2: Chain unit, quasi-1D Group 6: Icosahedral cage, 3D Group 10: Prismatic cage, 3D Group 3: Square-net layer, quasi-2D Group 7: Kagome layer, quasi-2D Group 11: Frank-Kasper cage, 3D Group 4: Square-planar framework Group 8: Generic RE/high-CN cage, 3D Group 12: High-CN metallic framework Group 13: Hexagonal layer/packing Group 14: Honeycomb layer, quasi-2D Group 15: Triangular-planar framework Group 16: Octahedral unit, 3D Group 17: Dense 3D percolating metallic framework

c d

Figure 5: Motif groups discovered from the seed and assigned across the study. The groups are discovered from the seed structures’ motifs, and the motifs of the generated structures are then assigned to them (10,096 motifs across all 1,557 structures). (a) Word clouds of the 17 motif groups; each group is summarized by its most representative keywords, ranked by TF–IDF over the group’s motif descriptions from candidate terms proposed by the language-model agents. (b) For each group, the fraction of contributing structures that are stable or metastable (blue) versus unstable (red). (c) For each group, the distribution of saturation magnetization 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 across the structures that contain a motif from that group; the dashed line marks the 1 T design target. (d) For each group, the number of contributing structures from the Materials Project seed set ( seed , grey) and from MatEvolve (MatEvolve , black). 

they appeared in the seed, the generated set, both or neither. Of the binary and ternary combinations that occurred at all, almost all already appeared in the seed—only ∼3% of observed binary and ∼2% of observed ternary combinations were unique to the generated set—so at low order the gen-erated set introduced essentially no new combinations; the novelty appeared instead at the whole-structure level, as the quaternary analysis below shows. Quaternary combinations were sampled far more sparsely: of the 2,380 possible com-binations, 504 occurred in both sets, 715 in the seed only, 123 in the generated set only, and 1,038 in neither. Of the 600 generated structures, 121 were built from combinations of motif groups that appeared in no seed structure, suggesting that—at the resolution of this grouping—MatEvolve’s nov-elty was largely combinatorial, favouring new combinations of the seed’s existing groups over new groups. Whether those combinations are stable is a separate question. For each of the 136 group pairs, we computed the fraction of structures containing that pair that are stable or metastable, across the seed and generated sets (Fig. 6c). Three pairs rank highest, at 81 –91% ; each is supported by a modest number of structures, so, as the top three of 136, they are best interpreted as a set of frequently stable pairings rather than as a strict ranking. Each corresponds to the local-motif signature of a recognizable intermetallic family—an analogy we draw after ranking rather than a prediction: a kagome net stacked with a honeycomb net ( 52 structures), as in the layered R 2TM 17 -type rare-earth–transition-metal magnets (e.g. Sm 2Fe 17 ) [63, 56], whose Th 2Ni 17 /Th 2Zn 17 

skeletons alternate kagome-type and dumbbell-substituted honeycomb Fe layers; a ring motif co-occurring with an icosahedral (CN,12) coordination shell ( 32 structures), as in the topologically close-packed (Frank–Kasper) phases, of which the Laves phases are the simplest members [60, 58]; 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs ba c

> Kagome layer, quasi-2D Chain unit, quasi-1D Square-net layer, quasi-2D Square-planar framework Ring coordination motif Icosahedral cage, 3D Generic RE/high-CN cage, 3D Dimer/dumbbell unit Prismatic cage, 3D Frank-Kasper cage, 3D High-CN close-packed metallic framework Hexagonal layer/packing Honeycomb layer, quasi-2D Triangular-planar framework Octahedral unit, 3D Dense 3D percolating metallic framework Octahedral unit, 3D Triangular-planar framework Honeycomb layer, quasi-2D Hexagonal layer/packing High-CN close-packed metallic framework Frank-Kasper cage, 3D Prismatic cage, 3D Dimer/dumbbell unit Generic RE/high-CN cage, 3D Kagome layer, quasi-2D Icosahedral cage, 3D Ring coordination motif Square-planar framework Square-net layer, quasi-2D Chain unit, quasi-1D Tetrahedral unit, 0D-to-3D
> Less than 20 structures 20-50 structures More than 50 structures
> Stable/Metastable Unstable

Binary Ternary Quaternary         

> Only in 𝒟 !""#
> Only in 𝒟 $%&'()*("
> Both 𝒟 $%&'()*(" and 𝒟 !""#
> Neither 𝒟 $%&'()*(" nor 𝒟 !""#

Figure 6: Motif-group composition, combination coverage and pairwise stability across the 1,557 structures. (a) Structure map: each of the 1,557 structures is represented by the set of 17 motif groups it contains and embedded so that structures sharing groups—or built from mutually substitutable groups—lie close together (t-SNE on a substitutability-weighted set-overlap distance; axes are arbitrary embedding coordinates). Marker shape encodes origin—Materials Project seed structures (tripods) versus MatEvolve-generated structures (circles); the origin is denoted by marker shape, not by shade as in Fig. 5d, and the colour encodes stability: blue for stable or metastable and red for unstable; grey contours are a kernel-density estimate of the seed structures’ distribution in the embedding. (b) Coverage of motif-group combinations by order: for the binary, ternary and quaternary combinations of the 17 groups, the fraction of all possible combinations observed only in the seed set ( seed ), only among the generated structures ( MatEvolve ), in both, or in neither (counts in parentheses). (c) Pairwise motif-group stability: for every pair of the 17 groups, a pie gives the fraction of the structures containing that pair that are stable or metastable (blue) versus unstable (red), and pie size is binned by the number of contributing structures (more than 50, 20–50, or fewer than 20). 

and a triangular-planar metal framework with a network-isolated unit (no homoatomic bonds), as in metal-rich rare-earth transition-metal borides—Nd 2Fe 14 B the archetype, with its boron atoms isolated in trigonal prisms of iron [65]. Taken together, these analyses support two conclusions at this group resolution. First, MatEvolve advances mainly by recombination rather than invention: where its struc-tures depart from the seed, they form new arrangements of the existing motif vocabulary rather than new building blocks, and the most stable of these fall into recognizable intermetallic families. This is not in tension with the new prototypes reported above: a prototype is a whole-structure arrangement, so a combination of familiar local motifs re-alized in an arrangement absent from the reference can be combinatorially familiar in its parts while being new as a prototype—the advance is new global arrangements of a shared local vocabulary, not new local building blocks. Second, because that vocabulary is human-readable, the representation that generates a structure also allows us to read it back—a step toward an interpretable design language. Turning these descriptive regularities into predictive design rules and probing novelty below the group resolution remain for future work. 

Discussion 

MatEvolve shows that the motif profile serves not merely as a description of a material but as the medium for ma-terial design: the agent edits the profile and constructs a crystal from the modified one, and the most promising candidates are validated by first-principles calculation. On the rare-earth-lean permanent-magnet task it matched a magnetization-conditioned generative model on the target property and reached new structural prototypes far more often—so an agent designing at the level of motifs is competitive with generators trained for the task. 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

A second strength is transferability. The agent is a com-mercial language model (Claude Fable 5), used as deliv-ered and never fine-tuned on magnetic-materials data, yet it designs competitive magnets. The magnetism-specific in-gredients are a few swappable components—the objective, the property surrogate, the seed set, and the first-principles settings—while the motif-editing loop is not tailored to magnetism; retargeting therefore requires no retraining, only a reset objective and revised task procedures, carried out largely in natural language so that a scientist from the target field can direct the search. MatEvolve is therefore best used to complement fast-trained generators rather than replace them—wherever a design must be understood, checked, or reused for a new target. Seen more broadly, MatEvolve is a small instance of a larger shift—AI becoming an engine of scientific discovery, now argued to mark a new, fifth paradigm of science [2, 3, 4]. What a materials example adds is a template built on dis-cipline rather than autonomy: an agent earns trust when its proposals are readable, admitted only once they reconstruct a real structure, and adjudicated by first principles rather than by the model itself. Its deeper promise, though, is an iterative cycle between the two directions of this paradigm. One— AI for science —is realized here: the agent accelerates discovery, proposing and verifying candidates at a scale beyond manual reach. The other— science for AI —this work only motivates: because the agent reasons in readable terms, the insights it exposes could be read back to sharpen the sci-entist’s understanding and inform the design of a subsequent, more capable agent—a loop we do not close here. It is this mutual reinforcement, rather than autonomy, that we see as the way forward: not a black box that supplants the scientist, but AI and science advancing each other. Several limitations bound these claims. The demon-stration is computational, and its property scope is nar-row. DFT evaluates stability and saturation magnetization, but not magnetocrystalline anisotropy, Curie temperature, or synthesizability—each decisive for a working magnet— thus, the candidates are precursors to functional magnets rather than instances of them. The magnetization values are moreover 0 K collinear upper bounds (for the heavy rare earths, the antiparallel 4𝑓 –3𝑑 coupling can partly compen-sate the transition-metal moment), and stability is assessed thermodynamically, from pure-GGA energies and without a phonon screen. Establishing whether any candidate becomes a usable magnet will require these further figures of merit and, ultimately, synthesis. The search is also loosely guided, and its analysis inherits assumptions from the reference set. The agent itself sees no first-principles feedback within a design step—DFT labels re-enter only through the parent pool and the ERS; the motif vocabulary is clustered once from the reference structures, so novelty is read categorically, as previously unobserved com-binations of fixed groups; and the recommender is calibrated on crystals only by analogy with the alloy setting in which it was validated. Feeding the surrogate and DFT signals back into the agent’s reasoning, re-deriving the groups as 

Algorithm 1 MatEvolve generation loop                                          

> Input: seed population Π0; objective 
> Output: the DFT-validated candidates accumulated over all generations 1: for 𝑔 = 1 to 3do
> 2: select a parent set from Π𝑔 −1
> 3: ←{STRUCTURE TRANSLATE (𝑆 ) ∶ 𝑆 a selected parent }
> 4: ←{STRUCTURE DESIGN (parents ⊆,)}
> 5: rank by the ERS ⊳Details are shown in Methods 5
> 6: ←DFT-VALIDATE (top-100 of by ERS rank )
> 7: Π𝑔 ←Π𝑔 −1 ∪
> 8: end for

data accrue, grading novelty continuously, and validating the recommender directly on crystals are natural next steps. How the motif profile stands in relation to earlier text-based treatments of crystals is set out in Supplementary Information S7. 

Methods 

1. Evolutionary search over motif profiles 

MatEvolve combines the components above into an evo-lutionary search over motif profiles (Algorithm 1). The population is initialized from the seed set seed and evolved for three generations. In each generation, parents are se-lected from the current pool; Structure Translate writes each selected parent as a motif profile (Methods 2); Structure Design edits these parent profiles into offspring and realizes them as candidate structures (Methods 3); the ERS ranks the candidates (Methods 5); and density-functional theory validates them in that priority order (Methods 6). Every validated candidate—whether or not it is stable—is added to the pool, updating both the parent pool and the ERS evidence set for the next generation. Thus, the search is informed by all of its own first-principles labels. Parent selection. In the magnet run reported here, each design step draws two par-ents from the current pool—one from the 200 structures with the lowest energy above the convex hull and one from the 

200 structures with the highest saturation magnetization— and combines them by crossover into a single offspring. Thus, each candidate inherits from a stability-favored and a magnetization-favored parent. The element- and geometry-mutation operators (Methods 3; Supplementary Informa-tion S3) are available in the framework but were not applied in this run. In each generation, 200 offspring are proposed and the ERS selects the top 100 for DFT validation, giving 

300 validated structures across the three generations; the 300 

unselected proposals are additionally relaxed as diagnostics, outside the search loop. 

2. Structure Translate — forward translation with bidirectional-consistency enforcement 

Structure Translate turns a crystal 𝑆 into a validated 

motif profile 𝑇 . A profile that merely sounds plausible can still be incomplete—it may omit details needed to specify the structure—so a profile is retained only if the original crystal   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs

Algorithm 2 STRUCTURE TRANSLATE : forward translation with bidirectional-consistency enforcement                                         

> Input: crystal 𝑆
> Output: validated motif profile 𝑇 , or reject
> 1: feedback ←∅
> 2: for 𝑖 = 1 to 5do
> 3: 𝑇 ←CIF2T EXT (𝑆, feedback )
> 4: 𝑆 ′←TEXT 2CIF (𝑇 )
> 5: 𝑇 ′←CIF2T EXT (𝑆 ′)
> 6: if COVERAGE (𝑇 , 𝑇 ′)and STRUCTURE MATCHER (𝑆, 𝑆 ′)then re-turn motif profile 𝑇
> 7: feedback ←missing/spurious motifs; composition or symmetry mismatch 8: end for
> 9: return reject

can be rebuilt from it. We call this round-trip test bidirec-tional consistency . The translation is performed through the accept-or-revise loop of Algorithm 2 using the two prompt-based basis functions, CIF2T EXT and T EXT 2CIF, whose implementations are given in Supplementary Information S1 and S2. CIF2T EXT drafts a profile 𝑇 from 𝑆 ; T EXT 2CIF reconstructs a crystal 𝑆 ′ from 𝑇 ; and 𝑆 ′ is passed through CIF2T EXT once more to produce a profile 𝑇 ′ for checking. When the checks fail, the agent revises the profile rather than discarding it: deterministic, machine-checkable feedback— the target motifs that were missing or spurious, and any com-position or symmetry mismatch—is returned, and a revised profile 𝑇 is drafted, with a maximum of five attempts. 

Acceptance — round-trip fidelity. A draft profile 𝑇 is accepted—and the loop stops—only when the crystal rebuilt from it agrees with the original in two complementary aspects: it must be built from the same motifs and assemble them into the same structure. The two checks in Algorithm 2 test these requirements in turn. The first, motif coverage 

COVERAGE (𝑇 , 𝑇 ′), asks whether the reconstruction retains the same building blocks; it compares the target motif set 

𝑇 = { 𝑡 1, … , 𝑡 |𝑇 |} with the set 𝑇 ′ obtained by re-translating the reconstruction. Writing [ 𝑡 ⪯ 𝑈 ] for the indicator that a motif 𝑡 is present in a set 𝑈 (matched at the archetype level, with a motif split into finer pieces counted as present), the recall 𝑟 and precision 𝑝 are 

𝑟 = 1

|𝑇 |∑

> 𝑡 ∈𝑇

[ 𝑡 ⪯ 𝑇 ′ ], 𝑝 = 1

|𝑇 ′|∑ 

> 𝑡 ′∈𝑇 ′

[ 𝑡 ′ ⪯ 𝑇 ], (1) Requiring 𝑟 = 1 ensures that every target motif reappears, so that no building block is lost or misdescribed in the round trip; the looser 𝑝 ≥ 0.7 allows a few additional motifs, since a faithful reconstruction may describe the same structure at slightly finer granularity. An excess of detail is therefore considered benign, whereas a missing motif represents lost information. The second check, S TRUC -

> TURE

MATCHER (𝑆, 𝑆 ′), then asks whether those building blocks were assembled correctly, accepting the profile only when the rebuilt crystal 𝑆 ′ matches the original 𝑆 ge-ometrically (pymatgen, using the acceptance tolerances  

> ltol

0.4, stol 0.7, angle_tol 15 ◦). The two checks are complementary—a profile can name the correct motifs but arrange them incorrectly, or reproduce the coordinates while relying on different motifs—so passing both certifies that 𝑇 

encodes 𝑆 faithfully and sufficiently. Coverage is applied first because it directly tests the defining building blocks, providing a semantic agreement that a global coordinate metric can mask. The recall and precision defined here are reused wherever two motif profiles are compared (Meth-ods 3). 

Reconstruction fidelity. A valid CIF returned by T EXT 2CIF is pre-relaxed with M3GNet [13] and reduced to its primitive cell before it re-enters the loop (Supplementary Informa-tion S2); the fidelity measures reported in Section 2.3 were computed on the raw T EXT 2CIF output, before that pre-relaxation. Shape fidelity was quantified with the continuous shape measure (CShM),  = 100 min ∑𝑖 |𝑞 𝑖 −𝑝 𝑖 |2∕ ∑𝑖 |𝑞 𝑖 −

𝑞 0|2, where 𝑞 𝑖 are the atomic positions of the reference, 𝑝 𝑖 

those of the reconstruction and 𝑞 0 the reference centroid, and the minimization runs over translation, rotation, uniform scaling and atom correspondence. The measure scores the deviation of a structure from a reference on a scale of 0–

100 , where  = 0 denotes an identical match and larger values indicate greater distortion [49, 50]. The original structure served as the reference; measures were computed with SHAPE and cosymlib [66, 67]. The measure is dimen-sionless. Because the denominator is the second moment of the point set about its centroid, a given atomic displacement yields a smaller value in a more extended point set. The interpretive bands quoted in Section 2.3 were calibrated on single coordination polyhedra and are used there to order the reconstructions and describe the distribution, not as an acceptance criterion; acceptance is decided by the round-trip tests above. Atomic displacements are reported as the root-mean-square distance between corresponding atomic positions after the same superposition, in Ångstroms. 

3. Structure Design — offspring proposal and realization 

Structure Design creates a new candidate crystal by edit-ing the motif profiles of existing structures—recombining or mutating their building blocks rather than sampling from a distribution of known structures. Rebuilding a crystal from an edited profile is underdetermined, since the same profile can be realized by more than one arrangement of atoms; a generated crystal is therefore retained only if it actually contains the motifs that were designed. Structure Design follows the loop in Algorithm 3. A de-sign agent—the evolutionary operator E VO OPERATOR (Sup-plementary Information S3)—reads one or two parent pro-files from the current pool and proposes an offspring profile 

𝑇 of f by crossing over motifs from two parents or by applying element or geometry mutations to a parent’s motifs. The basis function T EXT 2CIF (Supplementary Information S2) then realizes 𝑇 of f as a candidate crystal 𝑆 of f .

Acceptance — realization consistency. A generated crys-tal is accepted only if it realizes the profile from which it was designed. Here, the target is a profile , not an existing   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 19

MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

Algorithm 3 STRUCTURE DESIGN : offspring proposal and realization                                            

> Input: parent profiles {𝑇 𝑎 [, 𝑇 𝑏 ]} ; objective 
> Output: candidate structure 𝑆 of f , or reject
> 1: 𝑇 of f ←EVO OPERATOR ({ 𝑇 𝑎 [, 𝑇 𝑏 ]} ,)
> 2: feedback ←∅
> 3: for 𝑗 = 1 to 5do
> 4: 𝑆 of f ←TEXT 2CIF (𝑇 of f ,feedback )
> 5: 𝑇 ′of f ←CIF2T EXT (𝑆 of f )
> 6: if COVERAGE (𝑇 of f , 𝑇 ′of f )then return structure 𝑆 of f
> 7: feedback ←uncovered/spurious motifs 8: end for
> 9: return reject

crystal. Therefore, there is no reference structure against which to perform a geometric match, and the check reduces to the motif coverage criterion of Methods 2: CIF2T EXT re-derives the motifs of 𝑆 of f as a profile 𝑇 ′of f , and 𝑆 of f is ac-cepted when C OVERAGE (𝑇 of f , 𝑇 ′of f ) passes—every designed motif is present and few spurious motifs are introduced. Otherwise, the missing or spurious motifs are returned as feedback, and the realization is retried, up to a budget of five attempts. This is a consistency check, not a measure of quality: it certifies that a candidate is built from the motifs it was designed to contain, not that it is a good magnet. Whether a candidate is stable, novel, and magnetic is decided downstream, where the ERS ranks it (Methods 5) and, if selected, first-principles calculation validates it (Methods 6), within the run described in Methods 1. 

4. Motif clustering 

We grouped the motifs into a small number of recurring geometric archetypes. Because a motif is text rather than a vector, ordinary distance-based clustering does not apply; instead, we used an agentic version of 𝐾 -means (Algo-rithm 4) [68], in which each group is represented by a proto-type —a short paragraph summarizing the motifs it contains, analogous to a centroid. Language-model workers voted on the group to which each motif best matched (assignment), and the update step re-summarized each prototype from its members and adjusted the number of groups. Only the categorical votes and prototype summaries came from the model; all counting and every merge, split, and stopping decision were deterministic. Thus, no numerical judgment rested with the model, and 𝐾 was discovered rather than fixed. Assignment (E-step). Each motif, shown alongside the current group prototypes, was voted on by 𝑅 = 5

independent workers (Claude Fable 5 at temperature 0.5; five workers trade off robustness against cost), with each worker choosing the best-matching group or none . If 𝑛 𝑖𝑔 workers chose group 𝑔 for motif 𝑖 , its consensus was the majority share, 

𝑠 𝑖 = 1

𝑅 max  

> 𝑔

𝑛 𝑖𝑔 . (2) A high 𝑠 𝑖 indicated that the workers agreed on motif 𝑖 ;repeated none votes flagged a geometry not yet covered by any group. 

Algorithm 4 MOTIF CLUSTER : agentic consensus clustering                                                       

> Input: a set of motifs 
> Output: groups (𝐾 discovered) and an assignment of every motif in 
> 1: ←initial prototypes proposed from (about a dozen) 2: repeat
> 3: E-step. each of 5workers votes every motif of →a group or
> none ; compute consensus 𝑠 𝑖
> 4: M-step. re-summarize each group’s prototype from its members; 5: merge groups with confusion 𝑐 𝑔ℎ ≥0.5;6: split a group with contested fraction 𝜌 𝑔 >0.3;7: birth new groups from ≥15 motifs voted none
> 8: until (mean consensus ̄𝑠 ≥0.8and ARI ≥0.95 , two rounds) or 8
> rounds 9: return and the converged assignment of 

Update (M-step). Each group’s prototype was first re-summarized from the motifs assigned to it—analogous to moving a 𝐾 -means centroid—so that the next round of voting used an up-to-date description. The routine then 

merged two groups that were frequently voted together, split 

a group whose members disagreed, and birthed a group from motifs repeatedly voted none . Two ratios drove these operations—the confusion 𝑐 𝑔ℎ shared by groups 𝑔 and ℎ,and the contested fraction 𝜌 𝑔 of low-consensus members (consensus below 0.6) in a group: 

𝑐 𝑔ℎ = |𝑔 ⊓ ℎ |

min( |𝑔 |, |ℎ|) , 𝜌 𝑔 = |{𝑖 ∈ 𝑔 ∶ 𝑠 𝑖 < 0.6} ||𝑔 | , (3) where 𝑔 ⊓ ℎ is the set of motifs voted into both groups and |𝑔 | is the size of group 𝑔 . Groups were merged when 

𝑐 𝑔ℎ ≥ 0.5 (over at least three motifs) and split when 

𝜌 𝑔 > 0.3, unless the contested votes were concentrated on one rival group, in which case the two were merged instead. Motifs that workers repeatedly voted none matched no current group. Once at least fifteen such motifs had ac-cumulated, the model analyzed them and summarized them into one or more new groups, which entered the next round of voting. Thus, 𝐾 changed only when the votes warranted it. Groups were defined at the archetype level—unit class, coordination geometry, and coordination-number band—so that each represented a recognizable building block. 

Convergence. The steps alternated until the groups stopped changing, as judged by the mean consensus ̄𝑠 = || −1 ∑𝑖 𝑠 𝑖 

and the agreement between assignments in successive rounds, measured by the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) [69], 

ARI = 

∑𝑔ℎ 

(𝑛 𝑔ℎ 

> 2

) − [ ∑ 𝑔 

(𝑎 𝑔 

> 2

) ∑ ℎ

(𝑏 ℎ

> 2

)]/( 𝑛 

> 2

)

> 12

[ ∑ 𝑔 

(𝑎 𝑔 

> 2

) + ∑ℎ

(𝑏 ℎ

> 2

)] − [ ∑ 𝑔 

(𝑎 𝑔 

> 2

) ∑ ℎ

(𝑏 ℎ

> 2

)]/( 𝑛 

> 2

) ,

(4) with 𝑛 𝑔ℎ denoting the motifs shared by group 𝑔 of one round and ℎ of the next, 𝑎 𝑔 and 𝑏 ℎ their sizes, and 𝑛 the total number of motifs. Clustering stopped when ̄𝑠 ≥ 0.8 and ARI ≥ 0.95 

for two rounds, or after eight rounds. 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

5. Evidence-based Recommender System (ERS) 

Within each generation, the ERS ordered the candidates produced by the agents so that costly first-principles valida-tion was performed first on the most promising candidates. It did not determine stability—that was the role of DFT (Methods 6)—but supplied an inexpensive, uncertainty-aware prior over which candidates were worth relaxing. The ERS scored each candidate based on its motif-group composition using Dempster–Shafer evidence theory, fol-lowing the descriptor-free recommender introduced for alloy discovery [44, 34], with the 17 motif groups defined in Methods 4 serving as chemical elements in that framework. The groups were fixed after clustering, and each candidate’s motifs were assigned to them before scoring, ensuring that the vocabulary over which the ERS ranked candidates remained consistent throughout the run. Because each motif group represented a class of geometrically similar building blocks, substituting one group for another was a physically reasonable operation—exchanging one structural building block for another—and the ERS learned from the observed structures which such substitutions preserved the target property. Each observed structure was represented by the set 𝑆 ={𝑔 1, … , 𝑔 𝑘 } of the motif groups it contained, with each 𝑔 𝑖 ∈

 belonging to the 17 -group vocabulary of Methods 4. Mul-tiplicity, connectivity, composition, and lattice information below this resolution were deliberately not encoded, so the belief returned by the ERS was a prior over motif-set plau-sibility rather than a thermodynamic prediction. Because composition was among the omitted variables, the group co-occurrences it learned partly reflected shared chemistry rather than structural interchangeability alone. Each struc-ture carried a binary target label 𝑦 𝑆 ∈ { ⊤, ¬⊤} with 𝑦 𝑆 = ⊤

when 𝑆 met the design objective; for the stability target used to prioritize the run, 𝑦 𝑆 = ⊤ when 𝐸 hull (𝑆 ) ≤ 𝜀 at the same 

𝜀 = 0 .1 eV/atom used throughout—a metastability window rather than strict on-hull stability (Supplementary Informa-tion S4). The evidence set  consisted of the labeled seed structures and was augmented each generation by the DFT-validated candidates, thereby allowing the recommender to refresh as the search progressed. Evidence was accumulated in two stages—the substitutability of motif-group combina-tions, followed by the target belief of a candidate—with each represented by a Dempster–Shafer mass function fused by Dempster’s rule. 

Substitutability of motif-group combinations. Any two observed structures sharing at least one motif group, 𝑆 𝑖 ∩

𝑆 𝑗 ≠ ∅, provide one piece of evidence as to whether the group combinations by which they differ are interchange-able. Writing 𝐶 𝑡 = 𝑆 𝑖 ⧵ 𝑆 𝑗 and 𝐶 𝑣 = 𝑆 𝑗 ⧵ 𝑆 𝑖 for the differing combinations against the shared context 𝑆 𝑖 ∩ 𝑆 𝑗 ,and taking a frame of discernment Ωsub = {sub , ¬sub} , the pair contributes 

𝑚 𝐶 𝑡 ,𝐶 𝑣  

> 𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑆 𝑗

({sub}) = 𝛼 [ 𝑦 𝑆 𝑖 = 𝑦 𝑆 𝑗 ], (5) 

𝑚 𝐶 𝑡 ,𝐶 𝑣  

> 𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑆 𝑗

({¬sub}) = 𝛼 [ 𝑦 𝑆 𝑖 ≠ 𝑦 𝑆 𝑗 ], (6) 

𝑚 𝐶 𝑡 ,𝐶 𝑣  

> 𝑆 𝑖 ,𝑆 𝑗

({sub , ¬sub}) = 1 − 𝛼, (7) where [ ⋅ ] is the Iverson bracket and the discount 𝛼 ∈ (0 , 1) 

leaves a residual mass 1 − 𝛼 on the full frame, encoding the uncertainty of a single observation. Combining all pieces of evidence bearing on a given pair of combinations over the data set  by Dempster’s rule (below) gives a substitutability belief 𝑀 (𝐶 𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑣 ) = 𝑚 𝐶 𝑡 ,𝐶 𝑣  

> 

({sub}) , symmetric in its two arguments. 

Target belief of a candidate. A candidate 𝑆 new is scored over every observed host 𝑆 host ∈  and every single substitution 𝐶 𝑡 ← 𝐶 𝑣 , with 𝐶 𝑡 ⊆ 𝑆 host , that yields 𝑆 new =(𝑆 host ⧵ 𝐶 𝑡 ) ∪ 𝐶 𝑣 and whose differing pair carries nonzero substitutability belief. Over the target frame Ω = { ⊤, ¬⊤}

each such host contributes 

𝑚 𝑆 new  

> 𝑆 host ,𝐶 𝑡 ←𝐶 𝑣

({ ⊤}) = 𝑀 (𝐶 𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑣 ) [ 𝑦 𝑆 host =⊤], (8) 

𝑚 𝑆 new  

> 𝑆 host ,𝐶 𝑡 ←𝐶 𝑣

({¬ ⊤}) = 𝑀 (𝐶 𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑣 ) [ 𝑦 𝑆 host =¬ ⊤], (9) 

𝑚 𝑆 new  

> 𝑆 host ,𝐶 𝑡 ←𝐶 𝑣

({ ⊤, ¬⊤}) = 1 − 𝑀 (𝐶 𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑣 ), (10) a Shafer discount in which the host transfers its own label to the candidate with a strength equal to the substitutability belief, with the residual 1 − 𝑀 (𝐶 𝑡 , 𝐶 𝑣 ) left as ignorance. 

Combination and ranking. Pieces of evidence are fused by Dempster’s rule of combination, 

(𝑚 𝑎 ⊕ 𝑚 𝑏 )( 𝜔 ) = 11 − 𝐾 

∑

> 𝜔 𝑘 ∩𝜔 ℎ=𝜔

𝑚 𝑎 (𝜔 𝑘 ) 𝑚 𝑏 (𝜔 ℎ),𝐾 = ∑

> 𝜔 𝑘 ∩𝜔 ℎ=∅

𝑚 𝑎 (𝜔 𝑘 ) 𝑚 𝑏 (𝜔 ℎ),

(11) which is commutative and associative. Thus, the fusion is independent of the order in which hosts are combined. Fus-ing all hosts determines a candidate’s final mass 𝑚 𝑆 new  

> 

, and candidates are ranked in descending order of the likelihood that they meet the target, 𝑚 𝑆 new  

> 

({ ⊤}) . The discount 𝛼 is fixed by a grid search that maximizes the cross-validated repro-duction of the observed labels ( 𝛼 = 0 .1), with the ranking being largely insensitive to it, as in the alloy setting [44]. 

6. Property evaluation and first-principles validation 

The validated quantities—the relaxed structure, total energy, energy above the convex hull, and target property— are recorded, and the structure is returned to the database. 

DFT Relaxation. Final structural optimization is per-formed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [70, 71, 72] with spin-polarized calculations (ISPIN = 2) to capture the magnetic nature of the rare-earth– transition-metal compounds studied. The generalized gradi-ent approximation (GGA) with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional [73] is employed to describe exchange-correlation effects. Initial magnetic moments are set to 2.50 𝜇 B for Fe atoms and 0.00 𝜇 B for non-magnetic sub-stituents. The projector augmented-wave (PAW) method [74, 75] is employed with Sm_3 and Fe_pv potentials to properly   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs

describe the valence electron configurations, using a plane-wave energy cutoff of 520 eV. Non-spherical contributions to the PAW spheres (LASPH = .TRUE.) and extended angular-momentum mixing (LMAXMIX = 6) are enabled for accurate charge-density mixing in these open-core rare-earth systems (the Sm 4 𝑓 electrons being treated in the core by the Sm_3 potential, with their moment restored as described below). Brillouin zone sampling employs Γ-centered 𝑘 -point meshes with KSPACING = 0.25 Å −1 .These settings follow established high-throughput practice for intermetallic convex-hull construction and match the Materials Project workflow used to compute the reference energies. With the Materials Project compatibility correc-tions applied, candidate and reference energies therefore lie on a common scale; each candidate’s energy above the con-vex hull is measured against a consistently computed hull, and the 0.1 eV/atom stability cutoff has the same meaning for generated candidates as for the reference database. The potentials are sourced from the POTCAR library version 5.4 of VASP [76, 75, 74]. Electronic self-consistency is achieved with an energy convergence criterion of EDIFF = 10 −4 eV, while ionic relaxation employs a force convergence criterion of ED-IFFG = −10 −3 eV/Å. Full structural relaxation including ionic positions, cell shape, and cell volume (ISIF = 3) is performed using the conjugate gradient algorithm (IBRION = 2) for up to 100 ionic steps (NSW = 100) with a maxi-mum of 100 electronic self-consistency iterations per ionic step (NELM = 100). Electronic structure calculations use the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections (ISMEAR = −5). The FAST algorithm is employed for electronic minimization, and orbital-decomposed density of states are computed (LORBIT = 11) for post-analysis of magnetic properties. 

Formation Energy Calculation. Thermodynamic sta-bility is assessed through formation energy calculations. The formation energy per atom, Δ𝐻 𝑓 , is computed as follows: 

Δ𝐻 𝑓 = 1

𝑁 

(

𝐸 total − ∑

> 𝑖

𝑛 𝑖 𝜇 𝑖 

)

(12) where 𝐸 total is the DFT total energy of the relaxed structure, 

𝑁 is the total number of atoms, 𝑛 𝑖 is the number of atoms of element 𝑖 , and 𝜇 𝑖 is the chemical potential of element 

𝑖 referenced to its standard elemental ground state. The formation energy serves as a key indicator of the stability of candidate compounds [77]. 

Energy Above Hull. Thermodynamic stability relative to competing phases is quantified by the energy above the convex hull. For each generated structure, a convex hull is constructed for its chemical system from Materials Project entries spanning the constituent elements; the energy above the hull is then evaluated as the difference between the structure’s DFT formation energy per atom and the hull energy at its composition, the latter taken as the proportion-weighted formation energies of the structure’s decomposi-tion products on the hull. A value of zero denotes an on-hull (thermodynamically stable) structure, and positive values denote metastability. Materials Project reference energies are used for the competing phases. 

Magnetization Calculation. The total magnetic mo-ment 𝜇 [𝑥 ] of a structure is recalculated to account for the open-core approximation used to treat the 4 𝑓 electrons of Sm [56]: 

𝜇 [𝑥 ] = ∑

> 𝑖 ∉Ln

𝑚 [𝑥 𝑖 ] + ∑

> 𝑘 ∈Ln

𝜎 𝑘 𝑔 𝐽 𝑘 𝐽 𝑘 , (13) where the first sum runs over the non-lanthanide atoms, with DFT moments 𝑚 [𝑥 𝑖 ] (the 4 𝑓 electrons of every lanthanide being treated in the core), and the second restores each lanthanide’s 4 𝑓 moment analytically: 𝑔 𝐽 𝑘 𝐽 𝑘 is its Hund’s-rule ground-state moment ( 𝑔 𝐽 𝑘 the Landé factor, 𝐽 𝑘 the total angular momentum), and 𝜎 𝑘 = ±1 denotes its coupling to the transition-metal sublattice. The 4 𝑓 –3 𝑑 exchange holds the rare-earth spin antiparallel to the transition-metal mo-ment, so by Hund’s third rule the net 4 𝑓 moment adds for the light lanthanides ( 𝜎 𝑘 = +1 ; Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, whose 4 𝑓 shell is less than half-filled) and opposes it for the heavier ones (𝜎 𝑘 = −1 ; Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er): 𝑔 𝐽 𝐽 = 0 .714 𝜇 B for Sm 3+ is added, whereas the larger heavy-lanthanide moments ( ∼ 7 –

10 𝜇 B) are subtracted. We neglect the 𝐽 -mixing enhance-ment of the Sm 3+ moment, which is small on the scale of the 1 T threshold [56]. The saturation magnetization is the magnitude of this net moment, 𝜇 0𝑀 𝑠 [𝑥 ] = 𝜇 0 |𝜇 [𝑥 ]|∕𝑉 ,where 𝑉 is the unit cell volume and 𝜇 0 is the vacuum permeability. 

Author Contributions 

D.-K.L. : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. M.-Q.H. : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Inves-tigation, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft. H.-P.V.-D. : Investigation, Validation. T.M. : Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation, Writing – review & editing. H.K. :Conceptualization, Investigation, Validation, Writing – re-view & editing. H.-C.D. : Conceptualization, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Data Availability 

The dataset of text descriptions for 957 magnetic mate-rials will be made available upon publication. Code imple-menting the MatEvolve framework will be released under an MIT license upon publication. Complete prompt templates will be released with the code repository; the Supplemen-tary Information specifies the agent architecture, validation criteria, and evaluation metrics.   

> D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 19

MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

Acknowledgements 

This work is supported by the JST-CREST Program (Innovative Measurement and Analysis), under grant num-ber JPMJCR2235, and the JSPS KAKENHI grant Num-bers 20K05301, JP19H05815, 23KJ1035, 23K03950, and JP23H05403. 

References 

[1] T. Hey, S. Tansley, K. Tolle (Eds.), The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery, Microsoft Research, Redmond, Wash-ington, 2009. [2] P. Berens, K. Cranmer, N. D. Lawrence, U. von Luxburg, J. Mont-gomery, AI for science: An emerging agenda, 2023. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2303.04217 . arXiv:2303.04217 .[3] C. Bishop, AI4Science to empower the fifth paradigm of scientific discovery, Microsoft Research Blog, 2022. [4] Y. Ioannidis, The fifth paradigm: AI-driven scientific discovery, Communications of the ACM 67 (2024). doi: 10.1145/3702970 .[5] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, K. a. Persson, The Mate-rials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation, APL Materials 1 (2013) 011002. URL: http://link.aip. org/link/AMPADS/v1/i1/p011002/s1&Agg=doi . doi: 10.1063/1.4812323 .[6] L. Pauling, The principles determining the structure of complex ionic crystals, Journal of the American Chemical Society 51 (1929) 1010– 1026. doi: 10.1021/ja01379a006 .[7] A. R. Oganov, C. W. Glass, Crystal structure prediction using ab initio evolutionary techniques: Principles and applications, The Journal of Chemical Physics 124 (2006) 244704. doi: 10.1063/1.2210932 .[8] Y. Wang, J. Lv, L. Zhu, Y. Ma, Calypso: A method for crystal structure prediction, Computer Physics Communications 183 (2012) 2063– 2070. doi: 10.1016/j.cpc.2012.05.008 .[9] H.-C. Dam, H. Kino, T. Miyake, From data to discovery: Challenges and solutions in AI-driven materials science, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 95 (2026) 042001. doi: 10.7566/JPSJ.95.042001 .[10] K. Choudhary, B. DeCost, Atomistic line graph neural network for improved materials property predictions, npj Computational Materi-als 7 (2021) 185. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-021-00650-1 .doi: 10.1038/s41524-021-00650-1 .[11] C. Chen, W. Ye, Y. Zuo, C. Zheng, S. P. Ong, Graph networks as a universal machine learning framework for molecules and crystals, Chemistry of Materials 31 (2019) 3564–3572. URL: https://doi.org/ 10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b01294 . doi: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b01294 .[12] B. Deng, P. Zhong, K. Jun, J. Riebesell, K. Han, C. J. Bartel, G. Ceder, Chgnet as a pretrained universal neural network po-tential for charge-informed atomistic modelling, Nature Machine Intelligence 5 (2023) 1031–1041. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/ s42256-023-00716-3 . doi: 10.1038/s42256-023-00716-3 .[13] C. Chen, S. P. Ong, A universal graph deep learning interatomic potential for the periodic table, Nature Computational Science 2 (2022) 718–728. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00349-3 .doi: 10.1038/s43588-022-00349-3 .[14] T.-S. Vu, M.-Q. Ha, D.-N. Nguyen, V.-C. Nguyen, Y. Abe, T. Tran, H. Tran, H. Kino, T. Miyake, K. Tsuda, H.-C. Dam, Towards understanding structure–property relations in materials with interpretable deep learning, npj Computational Materials 9 (2023) 215. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-023-01163-9 .doi: 10.1038/s41524-023-01163-9 .[15] T. Xie, X. Fu, O.-E. Ganea, R. Barzilay, T. Jaakkola, Crystal diffusion variational autoencoder for periodic material generation, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. ArXiv:2110.06197. [16] R. Jiao, W. Huang, P. Lin, J. Han, P. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Liu, Crystal structure prediction by joint equivariant diffusion, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 36, 2023. [17] C. Zeni, R. Pinsler, D. Zügner, A. Fowler, M. Horton, X. Fu, S. Shysheya, J. Crabbé, L. Sun, J. Smith, B. Nguyen, H. Schulz, S. Lewis, C.-W. Huang, Z. Lu, Y. Zhou, H. Yang, H. Hao, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Li, R. Tomioka, T. Xie, A generative model for inorganic materials design, Nature 639 (2025) 624–632. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-025-08628-5 .[18] B. K. Miller, R. T. Q. Chen, A. Sriram, B. M. Wood, FlowMM: Gen-erating materials with riemannian flow matching, in: Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of PMLR , 2024, pp. 35664–35686. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2406.04713 .[19] N. Gruver, A. Sriram, A. Madotto, A. G. Wilson, C. L. Zitnick, Z. Ulissi, Fine-tuned language models generate stable inorganic mate-rials as text, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. ArXiv:2402.04379. [20] L. M. Antunes, K. T. Butler, R. Grau-Crespo, Crystal structure generation with autoregressive large language modeling, Nature Communications 15 (2024) 10570. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54639-7 .[21] A. Merchant, S. Batzner, S. S. Schoenholz, M. Aykol, G. Cheon, E. D. Cubuk, Scaling deep learning for materials discovery, Nature 624 (2023) 80–85. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06735-9 .[22] T. Lookman, P. V. Balachandran, D. Xue, R. Yuan, Active learning in materials science with emphasis on adaptive sampling using uncer-tainties for targeted design, npj Computational Materials 5 (2019) 21. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-019-0153-8 . doi: 10.1038/ s41524-019-0153-8 .[23] N. J. Szymanski, B. Rendy, Y. Fei, R. E. Kumar, T. He, D. Milsted, M. J. McDermott, M. Gallant, E. D. Cubuk, A. Merchant, H. Kim, A. Jain, C. J. Bartel, K. Persson, Y. Zeng, G. Ceder, An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic materials, Nature 624 (2023) 86–91. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06734-w .[24] B. Meredig, E. Antono, C. Church, M. Hutchinson, J. Ling, S. Par-adiso, B. Blaiszik, I. Foster, B. Gibbons, J. Hattrick-Simpers, A. Mehta, L. Ward, Can machine learning identify the next high-temperature superconductor? examining extrapolation performance for materials discovery, Molecular Systems Design & Engineering 3 (2018) 819–825. doi: 10.1039/C8ME00012C .[25] R. Ouyang, S. Curtarolo, E. Ahmetcik, M. Scheffler, L. M. Ghir-inghelli, SISSO: A compressed-sensing method for identifying the best low-dimensional descriptor in an immensity of offered candi-dates, Physical Review Materials 2 (2018) 083802. doi: 10.1103/ PhysRevMaterials.2.083802 .[26] A. K. Cheetham, R. Seshadri, Artificial intelligence driving mate-rials discovery? perspective on the article: Scaling deep learning for materials discovery, Chemistry of Materials 36 (2024) 3490–3495. doi: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.4c00643 .[27] H. Wang, T. Fu, Y. Du, W. Gao, K. Huang, Z. Liu, P. Chandak, S. Liu, P. Van Katwyk, A. Deac, A. Anandkumar, K. Bergen, C. P. Gomes, S. Ho, P. Kohli, J. Lasenby, J. Leskovec, T.-Y. Liu, A. Manrai, D. Marks, B. Ramsundar, L. Song, J. Sun, J. Tang, P. Veličković, M. Welling, L. Zhang, C. W. Coley, Y. Bengio, M. Zitnik, Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence, Nature 620 (2023) 47– 60. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06221-2 .[28] Anthropic, Claude Fable 5 and claude Mythos 5, Anthropic, 2026. [29] V. Natarajan, et al., Accelerating scientific discovery with Co-Scientist, Nature (2026). doi: 10.1038/s41586-026-10644-y .[30] Y. Kang, J. Kim, ChatMOF: an artificial intelligence system for predicting and generating metal-organic frameworks using large lan-guage models, Nature Communications 15 (2024) 4998. doi: 10.1038/ s41467-024-48998-4 .[31] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics 378 (2019) 686–707. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2018. 10.045 .[32] T. H. Trinh, Y. Wu, Q. V. Le, H. He, T. Luong, Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstrations, Nature 625 (2024) 476– 482. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5 .

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

[33] D.-K. Le, M.-Q. Ha, T.-D. Nguyen, V.-H. Nguyen, H.-C. Dam, Crystallography as language: transforming structural data into textual description for LLM-aided materials discovery, Molecular Physics (2026). doi: 10.1080/00268976.2025.2610374 .[34] M.-Q. Ha, D.-K. Le, V.-C. Nguyen, H. Kino, S. Curtarolo, H.-C. Dam, Beyond interpolation: integration of data and ai-extracted knowledge for high-entropy alloy discovery, Digital Discovery 5 (2026) 1079–1097. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D5DD00400D .doi: 10.1039/D5DD00400D .[35] A. M. Ganose, A. Jain, Robocrystallographer: automated crystal structure text descriptions and analysis, MRS Communications 9 (2019) 874–881. doi: 10.1557/mrc.2019.94 .[36] T. Mohanty, M. Mehta, H. M. Sayeed, B.-E. Oded, I. Pitussi, A. Borenstein, V. Srikumar, T. D. Sparks, Crystext: A generative ai approach for text-conditioned crystal structure generation using llm, Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation 15 (2026) 416– 430. doi: 10.1007/s40192-026-00451-8 .[37] A. Niyongabo Rubungo, C. Arnold, B. P. Rand, A. B. Dieng, Llm-prop: predicting the properties of crystalline materials using large language models, npj Computational Materials 11 (2025) 186. doi: 10. 1038/s41524-025-01536-2 .[38] M. Munjal, J. Lee, C. Park, S. Han, Lattice lingo: Effect of textual detail on multimodal learning for property prediction of crystals, arXiv:2412.04670, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2412.04670 .[39] S. Ozawa, I. Takahara, T. Mizoguchi, Scale-dependent input repre-sentation and confidence estimation for LLMs in materials property prediction, arXiv:2605.03515, 2026. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.03515 .[40] B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, M. Balog, M. P. Kumar, E. Dupont, F. J. R. Ruiz, J. S. Ellenberg, P. Wang, O. Fawzi, P. Kohli, A. Fawzi, Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models, Nature 625 (2024) 468–475. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-023-06924-6 .[41] S. Jia, C. Zhang, V. Fung, Llmatdesign: Autonomous materials dis-covery with large language models, 2024. arXiv:2406.13163 , preprint at arXiv:2406.13163. [42] I. Takahara, T. Mizoguchi, B. Liu, Accelerated inorganic materials design with generative AI agents, Cell Reports Physical Science 6 (2025) 103019. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrp.2025.103019 .[43] J. Gan, P. Zhong, Y. Du, Y. Zhu, C. Duan, H. Wang, D. Schwalbe-Koda, C. P. Gomes, K. A. Persson, W. Wang, Matllmsearch: Crystal structure discovery with evolution-guided large language models, arXiv:2502.20933, 2025. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.20933 .[44] M.-Q. Ha, D.-N. Nguyen, V.-C. Nguyen, T. Nagata, T. Chikyow, H. Kino, T. Miyake, T. Denœux, V.-N. Huynh, H.-C. Dam, Evidence-based recommender system for high-entropy alloys, Nature Compu-tational Science 1 (2021) 470–478. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/ s43588-021-00097-w . doi: 10.1038/s43588-021-00097-w .[45] A. P. Dempster, Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multi-valued mapping, The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 38 (1967) 325–339. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177698950 .[46] G. Shafer, A Mathematical Theory of Evidence, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1976. [47] J. Schmidt, N. Hoffmann, H.-C. Wang, P. Borlido, P. J. M. A. Carriço, T. F. T. Cerqueira, S. Botti, M. A. L. Marques, Machine-learning-assisted determination of the global zero-temperature phase diagram of materials, Advanced Materials 35 (2023) 2210788. doi: 10.1002/ adma.202210788 .[48] H. Park, A. Onwuli, A. Walsh, Exploration of crystal chemical space using text-guided generative artificial intelligence, Nature Communications 16 (2025) 4379. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59636-y .[49] M. Pinsky, D. Avnir, Continuous symmetry measures. 5. the classical polyhedra, Inorganic Chemistry 37 (1998) 5575–5582. doi: 10.1021/ ic9804925 .[50] H. Zabrodsky, S. Peleg, D. Avnir, Continuous symmetry measures, Journal of the American Chemical Society 114 (1992) 7843–7851. doi: 10.1021/ja00046a033 .[51] S. Alvarez, P. Alemany, D. Casanova, J. Cirera, M. Llunell, D. Avnir, Shape maps and polyhedral interconversion paths in transition metal chemistry, Coordination Chemistry Reviews 249 (2005) 1693–1708. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2005.03.031 .[52] L. Shao, Y. Li, J. Yu, R. Xu, Divalent-metal-stabilized aluminophos-phates exhibiting a new zeolite framework topology, Inorganic Chemistry 51 (2012) 225–229. doi: 10.1021/ic201515z .[53] A. V. Funes, L. Carrella, Y. Rechkemmer, J. van Slageren, E. Rentschler, P. Alborés, Synthesis, structural characterization and magnetic behaviour of a family of [co 𝐼𝐼𝐼  

> 2

ln 𝐼𝐼𝐼  

> 2

] butterfly compounds, Dalton Transactions 46 (2017) 3400–3409. doi: 10.1039/c6dt04713k .[54] M. J. Mehl, D. Hicks, C. Toher, O. Levy, G. L. W. Hart, S. Curtarolo, et al., The AFLOW library of crystallographic prototypes: Part 1, Computational Materials Science 136 (2017) S1–S828. doi: 10.1016/ j.commatsci.2017.01.017 .[55] D. Hicks, M. J. Mehl, M. Esters, C. Oses, O. Levy, G. L. W. Hart, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, The AFLOW library of crystallographic prototypes: Part 3, Computational Materials Science 199 (2021) 110450. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2021.110450 .[56] T. Miyake, H. Akai, Quantum theory of rare-earth magnets, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 87 (2018) 041009. URL: https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.87.041009 . doi: 10.7566/JPSJ.87. 041009 . arXiv:https://doi.org/10.7566/JPSJ.87.041009 .[57] D. B. de Mooij, K. H. J. Buschow, Some novel ternary Th 2Zn 17 -derived carbides R 2Fe 17 C𝑥 , Journal of the Less-Common Metals 142 (1988) 349–357. [58] J. L. C. Daams, J. H. N. van Vucht, P. Villars, Atomic-environment classification of the cubic “intermetallic” structure types, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 182 (1992) 1–33. doi: 10.1016/0925-8388(92) 90570-Y .[59] P. Villars, J. L. C. Daams, J. H. N. van Vucht, Atlas of Crystal Struc-ture Types for Intermetallic Phases, ASM International, Materials Park, OH, 1991. [60] F. C. Frank, J. S. Kasper, Complex alloy structures regarded as sphere packings. I. definitions and basic principles, Acta Crystallographica 11 (1958) 184–190. doi: 10.1107/S0365110X58000487 .[61] F. C. Frank, J. S. Kasper, Complex alloy structures regarded as sphere packings. II. analysis and classification of representative structures, Acta Crystallographica 12 (1959) 483–499. doi: 10.1107/ S0365110X59001499 .[62] J.-X. Yin, B. Lian, M. Z. Hasan, Topological kagome magnets and superconductors, Nature 612 (2022) 647–657. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-022-05516-0 .[63] J. M. D. Coey, H. Sun, Improved magnetic properties by treatment of iron-based rare earth intermetallic compounds in ammonia, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 87 (1990) L251–L254. doi: 10. 1016/0304-8853(90)90756-G .[64] T.-L. Pham, D.-N. Nguyen, M.-Q. Ha, H. Kino, T. Miyake, H.-C. Dam, Explainable machine learning for materials discovery: predicting the potentially formable Nd–Fe–B crystal structures and extracting the structure–stability relationship, IUCrJ 7 (2020) 1036–1047. URL: https://doi.org/10.1107/S2052252520010088 .doi: 10.1107/S2052252520010088 .[65] J. F. Herbst, R2fe14b materials: intrinsic properties and technological aspects, Reviews of Modern Physics 63 (1991) 819–898. doi: 10.1103/ RevModPhys.63.819 .[66] M. Llunell, D. Casanova, J. Cirera, P. Alemany, S. Alvarez, SHAPE, version 2.1, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 2013. [67] A. Carreras, D. Casanova, P. Alemany, S. Alvarez, Cosymlib: A python library for continuous symmetry measures, Journal of Chemi-cal Information and Modeling (2024). doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00609 .[68] S. Monti, P. Tamayo, J. Mesirov, T. Golub, Consensus clustering: a resampling-based method for class discovery and visualization of gene expression microarray data, Machine Learning 52 (2003) 91– 118. [69] L. Hubert, P. Arabie, Comparing partitions, Journal of Classification 2 (1985) 193–218. [70] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B 47 (1993) 558–561. 

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 19 MatEvolve: crystal-structure design in a language of motifs 

[71] G. Kresse, J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular-dynamics simulation of the liquid-metal–amorphous-semiconductor transition in germanium, Phys. Rev. B 49 (1994) 14251–14269. [72] G. Kresse, J. Furthmuller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calcu-lations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mat. Sci. 6 (1996) 15–50. [73] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approxi-mation made simple, Physical Review Letters 77 (1996) 3865–3868. [74] P. E. Blochl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 50 (1994) 17953–17979. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevB.50.17953 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.50.17953 .[75] G. Kresse, D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projec-tor augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 59 (1999) 1758–1775. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.59.1758 . doi: 10. 1103/PhysRevB.59.1758 .[76] VASP Software GmbH, Available PAW potentials, VASP Wiki, 2024. URL: https://www.vasp.at/wiki/index.php/Available_PAW_ potentials , accessed: 2026-06-14. [77] M. Matsumoto, T. Hawai, K. Ono, (Sm , Zr)fe 12− 𝑥 𝑀 𝑥 (𝑚 =Zr , Ti , Co) for permanent-magnet applications: Ab initio material design integrated with experimental characterization, Phys. Rev. Appl. 13 (2020) 064028. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/ PhysRevApplied.13.064028 . doi: 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.13.064028 .

D.-K. Le et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 19 of 19 Supplementary Information 

Abductive crystal-structure design by agentic AI in a language of motifs 

# S1 CIF2Text and the motif-profile representation 

The agents are driven by a commercial language model (Claude Fable 5), used without any fine-tuning, and every agent is queried at a decoding temperature of 0 .5. 

CIF2Text prompts. CIF2Text reads a CIF and, aided by a deterministic geometry tool (neigh-bour lists within 3 .5 ˚ A under periodic boundary conditions and Voronoi coordination analysis), re-turns a JSON motif profile comprising a global-information block, a list of genes (motifs; the count is set by the model, typically 5–10) and a hard-magnet assessment. Each gene’s raw description is then rewritten into the geometry-only controlled vocabulary described below by a second standardization pass. Only the composition and the gene descriptions are passed onward—to Text2CIF for recon-struction and design realization (SI S2) and to the design agent (SI S3), via the {composition } and 

{text description } fields of their prompts; the global-information block of the raw CIF2Text 

output, including its structure type , lattice note and effective symmetry fields, is retained for bookkeeping only and never enters a Text2CIF or design prompt. No numerical lattice pa-rameter, space-group symbol or structure-type label therefore crosses the round trip. The system and user prompts are reproduced below (typographic rules and arrows normalized to ASCII); the user prompt’s {cif content } field is filled at run time. 

You are an expert materials scientist specializing in crystal structure analysis and magnetic materials. Our work focus on RE-TM-X systems. Describe structures the way a human expert does: - Start from physically meaningful units, not raw coordinates - Pair structural observation with physical implication immediately - Use known references (Fe-Fe ~2.5A, Nd2Fe14B benchmarks, etc.) - Flag anomalies vs. RE-TM-X family norms - Reason: structure -> interaction -> property in continuous narrative The text description need to be useful to infer structure-property relationship, and reconstruct CIF. ================================================================================ PART 1 - GLOBAL INFORMATION ================================================================================ Report each in 1-2 sentences: - Composition: atoms per unit cell, Z, atomic ratios - Lattice: parameters and physical meaning (compressed/elongated axis, layering) - Effective symmetry: actual physical symmetry vs. CIF space group ================================================================================ PART 2 - STRUCTURAL PATTERNS (GENES) ================================================================================ As a materials scientist, identify notable structural patterns that provide insight into this material’s properties. 

1A gene is a multi-atom structural motif carrying specific function. Use your expert judgment - not every structure has the same number of genes. Patterns to consider (select what’s relevant): - Sublattices: RE/TM spatial arrangement (BCC, FCC,..., geometry, distances, interactions) - Extended: Layers/chains/rods with specific composition/function - Structural anchor: Which sublattice forms the global scaffold - Networks: Connected frameworks (Fe-B, Fe-Fe beyond simple bonds) - Cages/polyhedra: Coordination environments around central atoms which you believe it be important. - Clusters: Local structure which contributed with one center atom and its environment (Fe4B, not generic Fe4 ; ring Fe6; Sm-Fe12 polyhedron) Skip: - Single atoms or simple dimers already covered in network description - Generic motifs common across many materials Genes may overlap in atoms or - focus on distinct functional roles. *Note:* (IMPORTANT) - Genes may span across unit cell boundaries - consider periodic images when identifying coordination environments and clusters. - Number of genes: Depend on your knowledge and your understanding. It should be from 5-10. - Describe geometrical information should support the design/reconstruct geometrical structure/CIF For each gene: - name: descriptive name of the pattern - description: 4-6 sentences covering: (1) geometry - describe geometrical shape, coordination, bond lengths/angles vs. references, which support enough to reconstruct geometry (2) functional role - exchange/anisotropy/stability (3) mechanism - direct exchange/RKKY/superexchange/CEF (4) property impact - effect on Tc, Ms, or K1 ================================================================================ OUTPUT FORMAT (JSON): FOLLOW STRICTLY THE PROVIDED JSON FORMAT ================================================================================ {"structure": { "formula": "...", "structure_type": "...", "global_info": { "composition": "...", "lattice_note": "...", "effective_symmetry": "..." }}, "genes": [ {"gene_id": "..." "name": "short name", "description": "..." }], "hard_magnet_assessment": { "anisotropy": "strong/weak/absent - reason", "exchange": "FM/AFM/neutral - mechanism", "stability": "STABLE/UNSTABLE - basis", "verdict": "hard/soft/uncertain - one sentence" }}## CIF FILE {cif_content} ## TASK 1. Compute bond lengths for atom pairs within 3.5A (apply periodic 

2boundary conditions), determine local structures (for example: using voronoi) 2. Generate Part 1 (Global Information) 3. Identify notable structural patterns as genes - use your expertise to determine what’s significant for this specific structure 4. Complete hard_magnet_assessment Return ONLY valid JSON. Do not add additional keys. 

Materials scientists reason about a crystal—and about the origin of its properties—in terms of recurring local structural motifs, such as coordination polyhedra, cages and characteristic bonded clusters, and the way these connect, rather than in terms of raw atomic coordinates. For the properties targeted here—thermodynamic stability and magnetization—it is the presence and ar-rangement of such motifs that drives the behaviour. We therefore represent a structure by its motif profile : the set of distinct motifs it contains, written as a natural-language paragraph together with the chemical composition. Each motif is described by its central species, the identity and geometry of the neighbours that coordinate it, and the length regime of its defining bonds (short, typical, or long), expressed in a controlled vocabulary so that the profiles of different structures are written in common terms and can be compared and edited. The profile records no atomic coordinates, no lattice parameters, no space-group symbol and no structure-type label: it states which building blocks a crystal is made of and how they are bonded, not where each atom sits. Identifying the chemically meaningful motifs of an arbitrary crystal is itself expert knowledge and is difficult to capture in fixed rules. We delegate it to a large language model that has been trained on a broad corpus of scientific literature and is prompted to act as a materials scientist, reading the structure and naming its motifs. Expressing the result as text—the medium in which the model reasons—is what lets the downstream design and synthesis agents operate on the repre-sentation directly. The controlled vocabulary and the exact bond-length regimes it uses are defined in the remainder of this section. 

CIF2Text names motifs in a geometry-only controlled vocabulary. After the descriptive pass above, a second standardization pass rewrites each motif entry into square-bracketed tags drawn solely from this vocabulary, so that motifs from different structures are written in common terms and can be matched and clustered; the vocabulary carries only shape, coordination, connectivity and periodicity, and deliberately excludes all property, electronic-structure and magnetic terms (those are reserved for the design agent, SI S3). Each entry declares exactly one motif type (polyhedron , cage , cluster , network , layer ,

chain , ring , dimer , isolated site , void , sublattice or interpenetrating ). Each atom car-ries a geometric role (center , vertex , edge , face , bridge , terminal , spacer , interstitial 

or framework ). The coordination geometry is named from a fixed set graded by coordination number—low-CN (e.g. linear , tetrahedral , square-planar ), medium-CN (e.g. octahedral ,

square-antiprismatic , tri-capped-trigonal-prismatic ) and high-CN ( cuboctahedral , icosahedral ,

Frank-Kasper-Z14/Z15/Z16 ), with distorted- and mono/bi/tri-capped- qualifiers—and re-ported alongside a CN bucket ( [low CN] 2–4, [medium CN] 5–8, [high CN] 9–16, [very high CN] 

>16), a shell composition ( [pure/binary/mixed shell] ), a connectivity tag ( corner/edge/face/vertex-sharing 

isolated , percolating , chained , layered , framework , interpenetrating ), a dimensionality ([0D] –[3D] , with quasi- variants) and, when known, the site symmetry as a Hermann–Mauguin symbol. Bond distances are made element-pair agnostic by comparing the observed distance d to the sum of covalent radii rsum = rcov (A) + rcov (B) of the bonded pair [1] (pymatgen radii may be used as a deterministic substitute); no raw ˚ A value appears in a standardized description. The regimes are given in Table S1: Every standardized motif entry is one paragraph following a fixed template: sentence 1 declares 3Table S1: Bond-distance regimes of the motif grammar. 

Tag Condition Meaning 

[short bond] d < 0.90 rsum compressed, strong overlap 

[typical bond] 0.90 rsum ≤ d ≤ 1.10 rsum standard bonding 

[long bond] 1.10 rsum < d ≤ 1.30 rsum stretched, weak 

[non-bonded] d > 1.30 rsum no direct bond 

the motif, its roled atoms, coordination, CN bucket, shell and dimensionality/topology; sentence 2 gives optional spatial or stacking context; sentence 3 begins with a bond-pair label and states its regime and the site symmetry; sentence 4 optionally adds a connectivity note. The standardizer’s system and user prompts are reproduced below. 

You are a crystal-structure motif standardizer. Convert raw gene descriptions into a controlled-vocabulary form that captures **3D geometry only** -- shape, coordination, connectivity, periodicity. Do not introduce any property, electronic-structure, or magnetic terms. ### Hard rules - All vocabulary in square brackets comes from ‘motif_vocabulary.md‘ -- no other tags. - Element symbols appear bare immediately after their geometric role label: ‘[center] Ti‘, ‘[vertex] O‘. - Convert raw bond distances to the regime labels in ?6 of the vocabulary using the sum of covalent radii of the bonded pair. **Never write a raw A value in the output.** - Each gene becomes 2-4 sentences. Use one continuous paragraph per gene. - Only include elements explicitly named in the raw gene text. Do not infer or carry over elements from other genes. ### Grammar Every standardized gene follows this structure: S1: A [MOTIF] of [ROLE] <Element>, [ROLE] <Element>, ... in [COORDINATION] coordination with [CN bucket], [SHELL], [DIMENSIONALITY] [TOPOLOGY]. S2: Optional spatial / stacking context -- where the motif sits relative to the cell or to neighbouring motifs. S3: [BOND-PAIR] in [REGIME] regime; site symmetry is [point group]. S4: Optional -- connectivity note ("shares corners with adjacent motifs", "isolated from other motifs", etc.) when not already covered in S1. S3 **must begin** with a bond-pair label, not with the regime alone. Wrong: ‘[short bond] regime between Ti and O ...‘ Right: ‘[Ti-O] in [typical bond] regime; site symmetry is [m-3m].‘ ### Hard rules that are commonly broken 1. **No magnetic / electronic terms.** Words to never use: ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, ferrimagnetic, exchange, anisotropy, hybridization, CEF, Stoner, RKKY, f-d, d-d, superexchange, moment, spin-orbit, easy axis, magnetic, magnetization, Curie, N?el. 2. **No element-role assignments by property.** Use only the geometric roles in ?2 of the vocabulary -- ‘ center‘, ‘vertex‘, ‘edge‘, ‘face‘, ‘bridge‘, ‘terminal‘, ‘spacer‘, ‘interstitial‘, ‘framework‘. Never ‘ magnetic TM‘, ‘heavy RE‘, etc. 3. **No raw distances in A.** Convert to ‘[short bond]‘, ‘[typical bond]‘, ‘[long bond]‘, ‘[non-bonded]‘ using the covalent-radius rule. 4. **One motif per gene.** S1 declares exactly one motif type. ---## TASK Standardize each gene below using the controlled vocabulary from motif_vocabulary.md. Return one paragraph per gene in the format: 

4Gene #<id>: <standardized paragraph> ## GENES Gene #1: <raw description> Gene #2: <raw description> ... 

# S2 Text2CIF: prompts, validation and iteration budget 

Text2CIF maps a design concept—an integral composition and a text description of the target motifs—to a CIF. That a profile can be turned back into a crystal at all rests on an analogy: a motif profile states a geometric object in words, as a problem in plane or solid geometry is stated and routinely solved without coordinates, so a competent reasoner—human or model—can construct a figure consistent with it, and Text2CIF uses a language-model agent in exactly this role. Because the profile fixes the motifs but not the coordinates, the realization is under-determined and a single profile may admit more than one valid crystal. Each proposed CIF is parsed and checked deterministically for validity: parseable syntax, full site occupancy (1 .0), integral atom counts, and a minimum interatomic distance above 1 .5 ˚ A. On failure the specific problem is returned to the agent (marked ##ISSUE## ) and generation is retried, up to a budget of five attempts; a valid CIF is then pre-relaxed with M3GNet, reduced to its primitive cell, and re-translated for the motif-coverage check of Methods 2. This five-attempt budget is the inner validity loop; Structure Design wraps it in an outer coverage-retry loop of the same budget (Methods 3, Algorithm 3). The system and user prompts are reproduced below; the user prompt’s {composition } and {text description }

fields are filled at run time. 

You are a crystallographic structure generator for RE:TM:X magnetic intermetallic compounds. ELEMENT DEFINITIONS: - RE (Rare Earth): Sm, Nd, Ce, Pr - provide magnetocrystalline anisotropy - TM (Transition Metal): Fe, Co, Ni (magnetic); Ti, V, Zr, Mo, W (stabilizing) - X (Interstitial): N, C, B, H - occupy interstitial sites - M (Metalloid): Si, Al, Ga, Ge, Sn - substitute at TM sites for stability INPUT INFORMATION: one design concept contains: - Composition: Target integral formula - Text description: Text description with Material Genes of ideal structure YOUR APPROACH: STEP 1: PARSE THE DESIGN CONCEPT - Identify target composition - List all genes and their origins: STEP 2: BUILD THE NEW STRUCTURE (GENERATE CIF) - Choose appropriate space group based on gene symmetries - Include all crystallographic data - Full occupancy (1.0) at all sites - Integral atom counts only STEP 3: VALIDATE GENE REALIZATION - Verify each designed gene is present in output structure - Check coordination geometries match gene specifications - Ensure no atomic overlaps (min distance > 1.5 A) - Confirm composition matches target formula OUTPUT: Return ONLY the CIF file contents. No explanations. If you receive ##ISSUE## feedback, analyze the problem and regenerate. ##DESIGN CONCEPT##: 

5Composition: {composition} Text description: {text_description} 

# S3 Evolutionary operator over motif profiles 

New candidates are produced by editing motif profiles. The operator takes the profiles of one or two parent structures and generates an offspring profile through one of three moves: crossover, combining motifs drawn from two parents; element mutation, substituting the species within a parent’s motifs; or geometry mutation, altering a motif’s coordination or connectivity. This is the only component that reasons about properties in order to propose edits—the ERS (Methods 5) later ranks the resulting candidates statistically—and it does so through a pluggable element-abstraction profile that groups elements into property-equivalence classes—for magnetism, for example, treating Fe, Co and Mn as a single moment-bearing class—so that edits can be proposed by functional role while the translation agents remain strictly geometry-only. The resulting offspring profile is emitted as a target for Text2CIF. The population is initialized from Dseed and advanced for three generations. In the reported run only the crossover operator is used: each design step selects two parents from the current pool—one drawn from the 200 most stable structures and one from the 200 of highest saturation magnetization—and produces a single offspring, so that every candidate combines a stability-favoured and a magnetization-favoured parent; the element- and geometry-mutation operators are provided by the framework but were not applied here. Design steps are repeated to populate each generation; the ERS ranks the offspring, and every DFT-validated candidate (Methods 5–6) joins the pool from which the next generation’s parents are drawn. 

Design-agent prompts. The design agent returns, as strict JSON, one offspring design—its motif set ( genes in the JSON), an integral composition, and a self-contained text description that Text2CIF can realize without parent context. The system prompt and the two task tem-plates (crossover, which receives two parents; mutation, which receives one) are reproduced below; 

{operator } and {description * } are filled at run time. 

> You are a materials design assistant for discovering novel RE:TM:X magnetic intermetallic compounds. PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: Design novel magnetic material structures that achieve: 1. HIGH STABILITY - Thermodynamically stable, resistant to decomposition 2. SYNTHESIZABILITY - Can be practically synthesized in laboratory 3. HIGH MAGNETIZATION - Strong magnetic properties (high Ms, high Tc, good anisotropy) All design decisions must be justified in terms of these three objectives. INPUT: For each parent structure, you will receive TEXT REPRESENTATION containing: - ### 1) STRUCTURE OVERVIEW: Formula, space group, structure type - ### 2) MATERIAL GENES: Local structural patterns with functional descriptions DESIGN OPERATORS: You have THREE operators to design improved structures. =========================================================================== 1) CROSSOVER - Combine genes from multiple parents ===========================================================================

6PURPOSE: Create superior gene sets by selecting from parent gene pools. GUIDANCE: - Selecting SUBSETS of genes (not all genes need to be in every skeleton); REORGANIZING gene combinations (different structural arrangements); MODIFYING gene connections (different attachment patterns) - Ensure selected genes have compatible coordination environments - Balance functional roles: exchange, anisotropy, moment, stability - Explore different gene combinations to create diverse stoichiometries =========================================================================== 2) ELEMENT MUTATION - Modify elemental composition =========================================================================== PURPOSE: Improve properties by changing elements in genes. GUIDANCE: - Substitute elements to enhance stability and/or magnetization - Add or remove elements to optimize the objectives - Slight geometry adjustment allowed if needed =========================================================================== 3) GEOMETRY MUTATION - Modify coordination geometry =========================================================================== PURPOSE: Improve properties by changing local geometry of genes. GUIDANCE: - Change geometry to enhance functional contributions - Modify coordination to improve stability and/or magnetization - Slight element adjustment allowed if needed DESIGN PROCESS: STEP 1: ANALYZE PARENT GENES - For each gene, identify its functional role (exchange, anisotropy, moment, stability) - Evaluate how each gene contributes to or limits the objectives - Determine which genes to preserve, modify, or replace STEP 2: DESIGN GENE SET AND COMPOSITION - Apply operators (CROSSOVER, ELEMENT MUTATION, GEOMETRY MUTATION) - Ensure designed genes can coexist in a single structure - Derive target composition from the designed gene set - Write comprehensive reasoning that guides the generator: * How genes were selected/modified from parent(s) * Key structural requirements (coordination, sites, distances) * Why this design achieves the objectives CONSTRAINTS: - Composition MUST be integral (no fractional occupancies) - NO micro-tuning (no "slight adjustments", "strain", "pressure") - All genes must be physically reasonable and coexist in a single structure OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT JSON ONLY): {"designs": [ {"genes": [ {"gene #<ID of gene. The ID strictly starts from 1>": "<Text description of the gene>"} ], "composition": "<INTEGRAL formula>", "text_description": "Text description of the ideal structure for the idea design" }], }NOTE: The ’text_description’ field must describe the target structure prototype by explicitly connecting it to the genes listed in the ’genes’ field. The description must provide sufficient structural detail that 

7a structure generator can construct the target structure. RULES: - Text description must be detailed enough for generator to create the correct structure - NO code fences. Return JSON only. - *Strict note*: genes and text_description must be *self-contained* for a generator with no parent context. Do not define genes by parent indices (e.g., A#2, B#1). - All genes must be physically reasonable and coexist in a single structure that improve STABILITY and/or MAGNETIZATION over the parent. ## TASK: {operator} Design one novel structure that improve STABILITY and/or MAGNETIZATION over both parents. NOTE: The ’text_description’ field must describe the target structure prototype by explicitly connecting it to the genes listed in the ’genes’ field. The description must provide sufficient structural detail that a structure generator can construct the target structure. OUTPUT: Return STRICT JSON.---INPUT PARENTS---## PARENT A: {description_1} ## PARENT B: {description_2} ## TASK: {operator} Design one novel structure that improve STABILITY and/or MAGNETIZATION over the parent. NOTE: The ’text_description’ field must describe the target structure prototype by explicitly connecting it to the genes listed in the ’genes’ field. The description must provide sufficient structural detail that a structure generator can construct the target structure. OUTPUT: Return STRICT JSON.---INPUT PARENTS---## PARENT A: {description_1} 

# S4 Evaluation metrics 

All generation methods are scored on a common footing. For a method producing a set C of DFT-relaxed candidate structures ( N = |C| ), every rate below is a fraction of N . In the head-to-head benchmark each method’s 300 DFT-validated candidates are selected by its own ranking procedure from a disclosed raw-proposal pool (baselines: top 300 of 1,000 by CHGNet-estimated formation energy and moment per atom; MatEvolve: top 100 of 200 per generation by the ERS), so the reported rates are conditional on each method’s selection step—each method evaluated in its intended mode of use. The full proposal pool comprises all 600 MatEvolve proposals, selected and unselected, every one relaxed with DFT. We fix a stability threshold ε = 0 .1 eV/atom, a design-target magnetization threshold (for this study) τ = 1 T, and a reference database Dref = Materials Project ∪ Alexandria. For a candidate 

c we define the predicates: stable( c) iff Ehull (c) ≤ ε; unique( c) iff c is not a StructureMatcher 

duplicate of another candidate in C (one representative per duplicate class is counted); novel( c) iff 

c matches no entry of Dref under StructureMatcher ; P(c) iff c satisfies the design-target property criterion (here P : μ0Ms(c) > τ ); and newproto( c) iff c realises a structural prototype absent from 

Dref (defined below). Following the crystal-structure generation literature [2, 3], a candidate is S.U.N. when it is simultaneously stable , unique and novel . We build a ladder of increasingly stringent design metrics 8on this established base by defining three nested sets: S.U.N. = c ∈ C : stable( c) ∧ unique( c)

∧ novel( c) , (S1) S.U.N. P = c ∈ S.U.N. : P(c) , (S2) S.U.N. proto  

> P

= c ∈ S.U.N. P : newproto( c) , (S3) so that S.U.N. ⊇ S.U.N. P ⊇ S.U.N. proto  

> P

. The three rates reported throughout are the corresponding fractions |S.U.N. |/N , |S.U.N. P |/N and |S.U.N. proto  

> P

|/N : a base S.U.N. rate, a property-targeted rate that adds the design objective, and a new-prototype property-targeted rate that further requires a new prototype—each a successively stronger notion of a useful discovery. For the permanent-magnet target of this study, the design-target property is P : μ0Ms > 1 T; the 1 T threshold marks an appreciable ferromagnetic moment of permanent-magnet relevance (Nd 2Fe 14 B reaches 

μ0Ms ≈ 1.6 T). The prototype predicate uses a label Λ computed in three steps, identically for candidates and for every reference entry. (i) Every element is replaced by a placeholder for its periodic block (s, p, d or f), so that within-block and partial substitutions map to a single skeleton (SmFe 12 ,SmFe 11 Co and DyFe 12 share a label). (ii) The block-collapsed structure is symmetrized (pymatgen 

SpacegroupAnalyzer , symprec = 0.1 ˚ A). (iii) It is encoded as an AFLOW prototype string [4, 5]: anonymized composition, Pearson symbol, space-group number and per-species Wyckoff positions, with species lettered by ascending stoichiometry (ties broken by Wyckoff signature, never element identity). Then newproto( c) holds iff Λ( c) /∈ { Λ( r) : r ∈ D ref }. This single rule is applied to every method and chemistry, so the cross-method comparison is not biased by a magnet-specific taxonomy. The same reference Dref and prototype rule apply to the full proposal pool (all 600) and to the benchmark set (the ERS-selected 300), so the two are directly comparable. Table S2: Effect of the evidence-based recommender (ERS). The 600-proposal pool of the benchmark run, split into the ERS-selected half (the benchmark set of Table 1 of the main text) and the unselected half, each comprising 300 DFT-relaxed candidates; the full-pool row gives the run’s total yield. Rates are on the three S.U.N. tiers. The selected-versus-unselected comparison is post-hoc and descriptive, and the two halves are not fully independent of earlier ranking, as the parents of generations two and three were drawn from ERS-prioritized candidates.            

> S.U.N. S.U.N. PS.U.N. proto
> P
> With ERS (selected 300) 74 (25%) 72 (24%) 63 (21%) Without ERS (unselected 300) 53 (18%) 41 (14%) 23 (8%) Full pool (600) 127 (21%) 113 (19%) 86 (14%)

# S5 Structure map by motif-group substitutability 

To relate structures through their motif content and to quantify combinatorial coverage (Fig. 6 of the main text), each structure is represented by the set of the 17 motif groups it contains. The distance between two structures Si and Sj combines their set overlap with the substitutability of the groups by which they differ, following the construction we introduced for alloy compositions [6, 7]: 

M [i, j ] = dsub (Si, S j )  1 − J(Si, S j ), where J is the Jaccard overlap of the two group sets [8] and dsub is a substitutability distance between the differing groups—small when those groups are readily interchangeable—derived from the Dempster–Shafer substitutability belief M of Methods 5, 9Algorithm S1 Motif-group word-cloud construction                                                                           

> Input: motif groups G(|G| = 17); standardized motif descriptions (SI S1); controlled vocabulary V; workers R= 5
> Output: the 50 highest-weighted vocabulary tags per group 1: for each group g∈ G do
> 2: for r= 1 to Rdo
> 3: Kg,r ←ExtractTags (descriptions of g, V)▷independent agent; SI S1 standardizer
> 4: end for
> 5: Kg←Dedup   S
> rKg,r
> ▷pool the 5 agents; normalize to canonical V
> 6: end for
> 7: for each tag tdo df( t)← |{ g:t∈Kg}| ▷groups containing t
> 8: for each group gand each tag t∈Kgdo
> 9: tf( t, g )←occurrences of tamong group g’s motif tags 10: w(t, g )←tf( t, g )·log  |G| /df( t)▷TF–IDF weight
> 11: end for
> 12: render the 50 highest-w(·, g ) tags of each group g, type size ∝w

whose evidence is the labelled seed structures augmented each generation by the DFT-validated candidates, discounted by the same uncertainty parameter α = 0 .1 used there. Structures are embedded from M using t-SNE [9]. Combination coverage (Fig. 6b of the main text) is obtained by enumerating, for each order k ∈ { 2, 3, 4}, the  17 

> k

 possible group combinations and labelling each as observed in the seed set, the generated set, both, or neither. Pair stability rates (Fig. 6c of the main text) are the fraction of structures containing a given group pair that lie within 0 .1 eV/atom of the convex hull; pairs whose rate exceeds 0 .8 are highlighted. Because all  17 2

 pairs are examined at varying and sometimes small support, this threshold identifies a robustly supported class of compatible pairings rather than individually significance-tested pairs. 

# S6 Motif-group word clouds 

Figure 5a of the main text labels each of the 17 motif groups by a word cloud of the controlled-vocabulary tags (SI S1) that recur among its motifs; because the terms are the same bracketed geometry tags that name the motifs, each word cloud reads in the grammar of the representation rather than in free text. The construction (Algorithm S1) has three stages. First, five independent agents extract, from each group’s standardized motif descriptions, the vocabulary tags present— reusing the standardizer definitions of SI S1. Second, the five tag sets of a group are pooled and deduplicated, each tag normalized to its canonical vocabulary form. Third, the pooled tags are weighted by term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF)—treating a group’s tags as one document and the 17 groups as the corpus, so that a tag’s weight rises with its frequency within a group and falls with the number of groups sharing it—and the 50 highest-weighted tags of each group are rendered with type size proportional to TF–IDF weight. 

# S7 Relation to text-based crystal representations 

Table S3 situates the motif profile among prior text-based treatments of crystals, ordered by the direction of the crystal–text translation. Both endpoint directions are established: automated description turns a crystal into text, and text-conditioned generation turns a specification back into a crystal. The motif profile differs from both. Against description, it is written in a geometry-only controlled vocabulary that withholds the coordinates, lattice parameters, space group, and 10 structure-type label that a description reports, and it is certified generative—accepted only if a matching structure can be rebuilt from it (Methods 2). Against text-conditioned generation, its realization step starts not from a composition-and-symmetry prompt but from the detailed motif profile itself, and is one leg of a design loop rather than the goal. Table S3: Prior text-based treatments of crystals and their relation to MatEvolve.                                         

> Work Direction Purpose Relation to MatEvolve
> Robocrystallographer [10] Crystal →text Structure descrip-tion Direct precedent of CIF2Text; its text reports space group and pro-totype and is an end product, not an editable object LLM-Prop [11] Text →prop-erty Property predic-tion Establishes text as a machine-readable crystal representation Lattice Lingo [12] Crystal →text
> →property Multimodal prop-erty prediction Establishes the value of semiglobal textual informa-tion Ozawa et al. [13] Representation
> →property Input-representation comparison Establishes that representation design governs model perfor-mance CrysText [14] Text →crystal Crystal generation Direct analogue of Text2CIF, conditioned on composition and symmetry rather than amotif profile

Two of these results bear directly on the profile’s design. First, Lattice Lingo reports that semiglobal textual information—connectivity and structural arrangement—contributes most to property prediction beyond graph-encoded local structure [12]. The motif vocabulary (Section S1) deliberately spans this range, from local coordination units through cages, nets, layers, and chains to connectivity and dimensionality, so the finding supports the vocabulary’s reach as a design choice rather than an assertion. Second, Ozawa et al. report that input representations carrying space-group information outperform composition-only inputs for property prediction [13]; the motif profile nonetheless withholds the space group, deliberately. A space-group label would be invalidated by almost any motif edit, making the profile brittle as an editing medium, and stating it would hand the round-trip test part of its answer, letting the generator reconstruct the lattice without using the motifs. The cost of this omission is what Experiment 1 measures. 

# References 

[1] B. Cordero, V. G´ omez, A. E. Platero-Prats, M. Rev´ es, J. Echeverr´ ıa, E. Cremades, F. Bar-rag´ an, S. Alvarez, Covalent radii revisited, Dalton Transactions (2008) 2832–2838. [2] T. Xie, X. Fu, O.-E. Ganea, R. Barzilay, T. Jaakkola, Crystal diffusion variational autoencoder for periodic material generation, in: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. ArXiv:2110.06197. [3] C. Zeni, R. Pinsler, D. Z¨ ugner, A. Fowler, M. Horton, X. Fu, S. Shysheya, J. Crabb´ e, L. Sun, J. Smith, B. Nguyen, H. Schulz, S. Lewis, C.-W. Huang, Z. Lu, Y. Zhou, H. Yang, H. Hao, J. Li, C. Yang, W. Li, R. Tomioka, T. Xie, A generative model for inorganic materials design, Nature 639 (2025) 624–632. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-08628-5 .11 [4] M. J. Mehl, D. Hicks, C. Toher, O. Levy, G. L. W. Hart, S. Curtarolo, et al., The AFLOW library of crystallographic prototypes: Part 1, Computational Materials Science 136 (2017) S1–S828. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2017.01.017 .[5] D. Hicks, M. J. Mehl, M. Esters, C. Oses, O. Levy, G. L. W. Hart, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, The AFLOW library of crystallographic prototypes: Part 3, Computational Materials Science 199 (2021) 110450. doi: 10.1016/j.commatsci.2021.110450 .[6] M.-Q. Ha, D.-N. Nguyen, V.-C. Nguyen, T. Nagata, T. Chikyow, H. Kino, T. Miyake, T. Denœux, V.-N. Huynh, H.-C. Dam, Evidence-based recommender system for high-entropy alloys, Nature Computational Science 1 (2021) 470–478. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/ s43588-021-00097-w . doi: 10.1038/s43588-021-00097-w .[7] T.-L. Pham, D.-N. Nguyen, M.-Q. Ha, H. Kino, T. Miyake, H.-C. Dam, Explainable machine learning for materials discovery: predicting the potentially formable Nd–Fe–B crystal struc-tures and extracting the structure–stability relationship, IUCrJ 7 (2020) 1036–1047. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1107/S2052252520010088 . doi: 10.1107/S2052252520010088 .[8] P. Jaccard, The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone, New Phytologist 11 (1912) 37–50. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.1912.tb05611.x .[9] L. van der Maaten, G. Hinton, Visualizing data using t-SNE, Journal of Machine Learning Research 9 (2008) 2579–2605. [10] A. M. Ganose, A. Jain, Robocrystallographer: automated crystal structure text descriptions and analysis, MRS Communications 9 (2019) 874–881. doi: 10.1557/mrc.2019.94 .[11] A. Niyongabo Rubungo, C. Arnold, B. P. Rand, A. B. Dieng, Llm-prop: predicting the properties of crystalline materials using large language models, npj Computational Materials 11 (2025) 186. doi: 10.1038/s41524-025-01536-2 .[12] M. Munjal, J. Lee, C. Park, S. Han, Lattice lingo: Effect of textual detail on multimodal learning for property prediction of crystals, arXiv:2412.04670, 2024. doi: 10.48550/arXiv. 2412.04670 .[13] S. Ozawa, I. Takahara, T. Mizoguchi, Scale-dependent input representation and confidence estimation for LLMs in materials property prediction, arXiv:2605.03515, 2026. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2605.03515 .[14] T. Mohanty, M. Mehta, H. M. Sayeed, B.-E. Oded, I. Pitussi, A. Borenstein, V. Srikumar, T. D. Sparks, Crystext: A generative ai approach for text-conditioned crystal structure generation using llm, Integrating Materials and Manufacturing Innovation 15 (2026) 416–430. doi: 10. 1007/s40192-026-00451-8 .12