Title: Tree-of-Experience: Hierarchical Experience Management for Self-Evolving Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.09044v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 02:15:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Tree-of-Experience: Hierarchical Experience Management for Self-Evolving Agents 

## Zihao Deng, Yining Zhu, Leiming Wang, Jingfei Lu, Junbo Wang, Chuncheng Ran, Yu Yang, Dixuan Yang, Jikun Shen 

Abstract 

Continual self-evolution requires LLM agents to transform en-vironmental interactions into reliable and reusable experience. Existing methods typically refine individual trajectories or ab-stract shared knowledge from related trajectories, but their ex-perience representations are often disconnected from the un-derlying reasoning process. This limits feedback attribution, cross-task transfer, and update and retrieval efficiency, particu-larly in complex reasoning tasks with outcome-level feedback. To overcome this limitation, we propose Tree-of-Experience (ToE), a structured experience-management framework that aligns experience organization with the hierarchical reasoning process of LLM agents. Specifically, ToE organizes the experi-ence into a shared tree of analytical perspectives and reasoning paths, whose reliability is calibrated through environmental outcomes to support systematic updating, transfer, and effi-cient retrieval. The experimental results on Game of 24 and FinEvolveBench show that ToE substantially improves both problem-solving performance and efficiency. On Game of 24, ToE achieves a 31.4% relative improvement in accuracy over the experience-free ToT baseline. On FinEvolveBench, ToE improves tsIC by an average of 41.24% over the experience-free pipeline across 12 evaluation settings, whereas conven-tional experience-management methods often underperform experience-free baselines. 

## Introduction 

Advances in reasoning, tool use, and memory have extended the use of large language models (LLMs) from autoregressive text generators to general-purpose problem-solving agents. Yet a truly general-purpose problem solver should be able to gain experience through continual interaction with the environment and adaptively self-evolve. The key challenge is that interaction history does not automatically become experience, as experience is not merely a verbatim record of the past but a structured interpretation of what mattered, why it mattered, and when it may matter again. Only by reflecting on past interactions, filtering incidental details, and extracting transferable experiences can an agent use prior outcomes to solve related problems more effectively. Prior studies have explored various experience abstrac-tion mechanisms that transform raw interaction trajectories into compact and useful experiences. These methods fall into two categories: intra-trajectory transformation and inter-trajectory induction. Intra-trajectory transformation Reflex-ion(Shinn et al. 2023),MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b) and ReMe (Cao et al. 2026) refines each trajectory into experi-ence units that remain tied to its original task context and are retrieved at inference time to assist semantically similar tasks. Although such methods reduce noise and hallucinations in raw trajectories, the resulting memories are often fragmented and context-dependent, limiting their transferability while in-creasing retrieval costs and inference overhead on new tasks. Inter-trajectory induction such as FLEX (Cai et al. 2025), SkillGen (Ding et al. 2026), and SkillRL (Xia et al. 2026) summarizes patterns across related trajectories to derive reusable experience, which can be served as a policy prior for unseen scenarios without relying on trajectory-level match-ing. By compressing large trajectory repositories into gener-alized experiences, these methods improve generalization to unseen environments. Their effectiveness, therefore, depends critically on the abstraction mechanism used to transform groups of raw trajectories into broadly applicable experi-ence. We identify four essential properties of an effective experience-abstraction mechanism: (1) Attributability : it should attribute observed outcomes to outcome-relevant fac-tors while filtering out incidental and task-specific details; (2) Transferability : it should extract principles or reasoning patterns that generalize across related tasks; (3) Evolvabil-ity : it should support the efficient accumulation, calibration, consolidation, and removal of experience as new feedback arrives or the environment changes; and (4) Efficiency : it should organize, retrieve, and apply experience with limited storage, computational, and contextual overhead. However, existing methods fall short along one or more of these dimensions, particularly in low-repetition tasks where outcome-level feedback is uncertain and may arise from mul-tiple interacting factors. Under such conditions, conventional approaches struggle to attribute outcomes to specific reason-ing components and induce reliable experience. To address these limitations, we propose Tree-of-

Experience (ToE), a structured experience-management paradigm designed specially for complex problem solving. Instead of inducing experience solely from sets of similar trajectories, ToE organizes experience according to the rea-soning structure of the problem itself. Since experience ulti-mately serves as context for future reasoning, ToE represents key analytical perspectives as a hierarchical tree and uses environmental outcomes to evaluate and update the corre-sponding reasoning paths. Its experience units can be inde-pendently retrieved, revised, and composed, providing im-proved feedback attribution, transferability, evolvability, and efficiency. 

Attributability. As illustrated in Fig. 1, compared with intra-trajectory transformation and inter-trajectory induction, ToE integrates reasoning processes from different task in-arXiv:2608.09044v1 [cs.CL] 10 Aug 2026 (a) intra-trajectory transformation 

> complete task trajectory

# …

> Experience
> agent
> Past Trajectory

… distilled knowledge items         

> Rule Reflection Insight Guideline
> Experience
> (b) inter-trajectory induction
> distill
> agent 123
> Root:Problem Category/ Task Objective level 1 level 2 level 3
> hierarchical analytical perspective
> Query Reasoning Answer Perspective Reward
> Query: Analyze the Sentiment Score of the Retail Industry.
> News1: “Government Gives Shopping Cash Support.”
> News 2: “Large Stores Cut Product Prices.”
> Thinking with Experience
> Q:1.15
> (c) ToE
> input output
> level 1 level 2 level 3
> input output
> Government Policy Cash Support Higher Spending
> Q:0.2
> Company Fundamentals Profitability Revenue Growth
> ……
> Environment Interaction
> Q:0.8 Q:0.8 Q:0.7 Q:0.5 Q:0.4 Q:0.5 Q:0.2

Figure 1: Comparison of experience-management paradigms. (a) Intra-trajectory transformation stores or transforms individual task trajectories; (b) inter-trajectory induction distills reusable knowledge from multiple past trajectories; and (c) Tree-of-Experience (ToE) organizes experience as hierarchical analytical perspectives and retrieves a structured reasoning path for inference. stances into a shared experience tree. The root represents the problem category or task objective, while each non-root node represents a critical reasoning perspective. Parent nodes capture general analytical dimensions, whereas child nodes refine, extend, or diversify them into more specific reasoning directions. A reasoning process is therefore represented as a progressive path through the tree. Because the experience structure mirrors the reasoning structure, an observed outcome can be propagated to the specific perspectives involved in the decision. This enables localized reinforcement or revision of relevant experience units. In contrast, conventional inter-trajectory induction of-ten summarizes selected trajectories into holistic experience entries. Without systematically analyzing how environmental outcomes support or contradict the different factors involved in a decision, the experience induction can be unreliable and inefficient. 

Transferability. The progressive decomposition of rea-soning perspectives improves experience transfer across het-erogeneous tasks. Rather than matching a new problem against an entire historical instance, ToE retrieves experi-ence at the level of individual perspectives or partial rea-soning paths. This distinction is important in low-repetition settings, where task instances may be semantically dissimilar but require similar analytical logic. For example, financial news varies substantially across days, while the reasoning perspectives used to assess sentiment, fundamentals, or mar-ket conditions may remain transferable. ToE reuses how a problem should be analyzed , rather than relying on surface-level similarity between problems. 

Evolvability. ToE organizes experience into manageable nodes and paths, supporting the addition of new analytical perspectives, the reliability calibration of existing paths, and the consolidation of redundant nodes. Efficiency. Compared with methods that repeatedly induce experience from related trajectories until inference time, ToE organizes experience before inference in a hierarchical structure. This narrows re-trieval to relevant branches and limits updates to affected nodes, reducing storage, computational, and contextual over-head. The resulting experience can therefore be generated, maintained, retrieved, and composed more efficiently. Thus, our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• We propose Tree-of-Experience (ToE), a structured experience-management framework that aligns experi-ence organization with the hierarchical reasoning process of LLM agents, thereby improving attributability, trans-ferability, evolvability, and efficiency. 

• We reveal a critical limitation of conventional experience-management methods in complex problem-solving tasks: their inability to accurately attribute outcome feedback can reinforce unreliable experience and even degrade per-formance relative to experience-free baselines. 

• We validate ToE on two complementary benchmarks. On Game of 24, ToE achieves 85.3% accuracy, outper-forming the experience-free ToT baseline by 20.4 per-centage points while reducing LLM calls by 78.7%. On FinEvolveBench, a low-repetition benchmark with de-layed, implicit, outcome-level feedback, ToE improves 

tsIC by an average of 41.24% over the experience-free pipeline across 12 evaluation settings. 

## Related Work 

Prior work enables LLM agents to reuse interaction history through episodic storage or experience abstraction. Episodic methods preserve complete or partial trajectories; for exam-ple, Synapse (Zheng et al. 2024) retrieves abstracted state– action trajectories as in-context exemplars. Although such representations retain rich context, they also entangle trans-ferable knowledge with instance-specific details and make outcome-level feedback difficult to attribute to individual reasoning components. To improve transferability, intra-trajectory methods trans-form individual interactions into compact experience. Re-flexion (Shinn et al. 2023) converts execution feedback into verbal reflections, while MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b) sum-marizes each trajectory into episodic memory and continu-ally calibrates its utility through environmental feedback for value-aware retrieval.However, independently derived mem-ories often remain fragmented and context-dependent. Inter-trajectory methods instead induce shared patterns across multiple trajectories. ReMe (Cao et al. 2026) extracts fine-grained procedural knowledge through success-pattern recognition, failure analysis, and comparative distillation, and SkillRL (Xia et al. 2026) recursively distills and orga-nizes reusable skills. While these approaches improve gen-eralization, the induced experience is typically derived from selected trajectory groups without a unified structure, making accumulated experience fragmented and incomplete. Several methods explicitly structure agent memory. MetaFlowLLM (Fan et al. 2026) organizes reusable exe-cutable workflows into a hierarchical tree, Mem0 (Chhikara et al. 2025) models entities and relations through a mem-ory graph, and G-Memory (Zhang et al. 2026a) structures multi-agent experience at multiple abstraction levels. Their organizational semantics, however, center on workflows, en-tity relations, or multi-agent interactions. In contrast, ToE structures experience as analytical perspectives aligned with LLM reasoning and calibrates their reliability through envi-ronmental feedback. This supports feedback attribution, sys-tematic experience updating, perspective-level transfer, and efficient retrieval, particularly under low task repetition and ambiguous outcome attribution. 

## Methodology 

Inspired by Tree of Thoughts (ToT), which enables language models to explore multiple reasoning paths over intermediate thoughts (Yao et al. 2023), we construct the experience repos-itory by mirroring the reasoning process of LLM agents. As shown in Fig. 1, we organize the experience pool E as a depth-constrained yet width-expandable tree, which can be denoted as: 

E =

n 

Πi, Qi, Mi

o |E| 

> i=1

. (1) Each tuple ei = ( Πi, Qi, Mi) denotes a specific ex-perience that consists of a depth-L analytical path Πi =(p(1)  

> i

, . . . , p (L) 

> i

), a feedback-derived reliability state Qi, and maintenance metadata Mi.As shown in Fig. 1, ToE organizes analytical perspec-tives hierarchically from general categories to more specific sub-perspectives. Given the news that the government pro-vides shopping subsidies while major retailers reduce prod-uct prices, the agent may analyze retail sentiment from two perspectives: government policy and company fundamentals .The former can be refined into cash support and higher spending , yielding an experience that government subsidies stimulate consumption and imply positive sentiment, with a Cl=Retrieve( Hl,ε)=Topk (𝐀 𝐀 𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀 （Hl,Children( p l-1 )))                 

> reasoning path
> Reward( at,ot)
> at
> ot
> UpdateQ(Q( εt), rt)
> rt
> merge
> environment PB3 previous updated Al=𝐀 𝐀 𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀𝐀 （𝐀 𝐀 , 𝐀 ）={𝐀 𝐀𝐀𝐀,1 𝐀 , ……, 𝐀 𝐀𝐀𝐀,|𝐀 𝐀 |𝐀 }
> Q1
> Q2
> Q3
> Q4
> Q5
> Q5
> Q5
> Q1
> Q2
> Q3
> Q4
> query PB1 PB2
> xp1p2p3
> p4p4p4
> ①①②②③③

Figure 2: Overall framework of ToE. Illustration of the rea-soning and experience-evolution process, including hierar-chical experience retrieval, environment-based feedback, re-liability updating, and experience expansion and merging. reliability score of 1.15. The latter can be refined into prof-itability and revenue growth , yielding a negative assessment that price reductions may weaken profitability and revenue growth. However, through continued interaction with the en-vironment, this experience may be assigned a low reliability score of 0.2, as price reductions do not necessarily lead to lower profitability. We posit that aligning experience organization with the reasoning structure of LLM agents improves outcome attri-bution, cross-task transfer, systematic experience updating, and retrieval efficiency. Realizing these benefits requires ToE to address three key questions. First, reasoning granular-ity : how should reasoning perspectives be defined to remain sufficiently abstract for cross-task transfer while providing concrete guidance for problem solving? Second, reasoning-path selection and expansion : given a new task, how should the agent select an appropriate path from the existing experi-ence tree or extend the tree with new reasoning perspectives? Third, experience-tree evolution : how should experience be accumulated, reliability-calibrated through environmen-tal feedback, and selectively merged or pruned while keeping the tree compact, effective, and maintainable? We address these three questions in the following subsections. The overall framework of ToE is illustrated in Fig. 2. Given a problem decomposition structure, ToE follows the agent’s reasoning path and recursively retrieves experiences relevant to the current reasoning node from the experience tree through the retrieval module. When no suitable experi-ence is available, the proposer generates a new experience path, while the merger consolidates semantically overlap-ping nodes to maintain a compact and efficient tree. After the retrieved experience is applied and evaluated through en-vironmental interaction, the UpdateQ module systematically attributes the observed outcome to the experiences involved and calibrates their reliability accordingly. Granularity of Analytical Perspectives The structure of the experience tree is not a predefined template. Instead, its semantics and granularity are jointly determined by the problem structure, the task objective, and the information required during problem solving. For example, in mathe-matical reasoning tasks such as the Game of 24, analytical perspectives may correspond to operator selection or num-ber grouping . In financial investment tasks, they may instead capture dimensions such as the macroeconomic environment ,

company fundamentals , or geopolitical factors .Within ToE, analytical perspectives at different levels form a progressive hierarchy from abstract reasoning dimensions to concrete decision criteria. A higher-level node describes a relatively broad analytical dimension, whereas each lower-level node inherits the semantics of its parent and further specializes a particular subproblem, causal mechanism, or reasoning basis. A root-to-leaf path represents a progressive reasoning process that begins with a general analytical di-rection and gradually specializes it into concrete evidence or decision criteria. In ToE, the organization of experience is aligned with the reasoning structure of the LLM agent. Accordingly, the semantics and granularity of the experience hierarchy are jointly determined by the problem structure, task objective, and information required during problem solving. The initial hierarchy can be constructed in two ways. For tasks with a well-defined reasoning procedure, it can be manually spec-ified based on prior knowledge of the task. Alternatively, it can be induced from multiple model-generated reasoning paths by recursively clustering and summarizing similar per-spectives at successive levels. We distinguish between two forms of problem structure. In a sequentially dependent structure, solving each subproblem depends on the result of the preceding one, and experience is retrieved separately at each reasoning step. For example, fol-lowing the ToT (Yao et al. 2023) formulation of Game of 24, the reasoning process can be divided into three stages corre-sponding to states with four, three, and two remaining num-bers, respectively. ToE retrieves an appropriate experience at each stage. By contrast, in an independent parallel structure, the solution requires multiple complementary perspectives that can be considered jointly. In FinEvolveBench, ToE re-trieves multiple relevant reasoning paths from the experience tree simultaneously and integrates them within a single infer-ence. For such tasks, the initial hierarchy can be induced by progressively clustering and abstracting collected reasoning paths, and is subsequently refined during continual evolution. The construction of a new node should satisfy three ba-sic rules. First, a child node must maintain a clear semantic subsumption relation with its parent: its content should ex-tend, specialize, or operationalize the analytical perspective represented by the parent node. Second, the new node must introduce information with genuine discriminative value, en-abling the model to derive additional conclusions, distinguish among candidate solutions, or revise an existing judgment. Third, the granularity of a node should remain balanced. An overly broad node provides insufficient guidance for subse-quent reasoning, whereas an excessively fine-grained node reduces the likelihood that the corresponding experience can be reused across tasks. Accordingly, a new child node is introduced when the cur-rent analytical perspective still contains multiple relatively independent subproblems and further decomposition is ex-pected to improve reasoning efficiency or cross-task expe-rience reuse. Expansion terminates when additional decom-position no longer contributes new reasoning-relevant infor-mation, or when the current node is sufficiently specific to directly support a local inference or decision. 

Reasoning Path Selection and Generation Autoregres-sive LLMs rely on structured intermediate reasoning to solve complex problems coherently and progressively. For exam-ple, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) organizes such reasoning into sequential steps, while Tree of Thoughts (ToT) extends it by exploring multiple candidate reasoning paths (Wei et al. 2022; Yao et al. 2023). Building on these structured reason-ing paradigms, ToE enables the reasoning process to evolve through accumulated environmental experience. Experience retrieval proceeds synchronously with LLM reasoning, al-lowing the model to draw not only on previously explored analytical perspectives but also on their feedback-derived re-liability. As shown in Fig. 2, experience retrieval in ToE proceeds synchronously with the LLM’s reasoning process. Depending on the task, reasoning may proceed through se-quentially dependent subproblems, as in the Game of 24, or across multiple independent perspectives, as in financial analysis. In the former case, ToE repeatedly traverses the ex-perience tree as reasoning advances step by step; in the latter, it retrieves multiple relevant reasoning paths to support com-plementary analysis. In both cases, the retrieved experience guides subsequent reasoning and identifies promising direc-tions for further exploration. Specifically, given a task input xt and the reasoning path constructed before step l, we define the current reasoning context as 

Hl = ( xt, Πl−1), (2) where Πl−1 = ( p1, . . . , p l−1) denotes the reasoning path established before step l. ToE retrieves candidate nodes from the experience tree E by reranking child nodes of pl−1 and selects the top-k ranked perspectives: 

Cl = Retrieve ( Hl, E)= TopK  f rerank 

> θ

 Hl, Children( pl−1) . (3) The prompt-based LLM reranker f rerank  

> θ

(·) assesses each candidate for task relevance and consistency with the exist-ing reasoning path, filtering out irrelevant, redundant, or in-compatible perspectives in the meantime. If no retrieved can-didate provides a valid continuation, ToE invokes a prompt-based LLM proposer that generates at most k new analytical perspectives. 

Al = f propose  

> θ

(Hl, k ) = {pl

> new ,1

, . . . , p l

> new ,|A l|

}. (4) Each proposed perspective extends the current analytical path as 

Πl 

> new ,j

= Π l−1 | pl 

> new ,j

, (5) where | denotes path concatenation. The agent will then tra-verse all the possible Πl 

> new ,j

at step l. When l = L or the stopping criterion is satisfied, ToE assigns a neutral reliabil-ity prior, Qi = q0, to a newly constructed analytical path. For a previously observed path, ToE retrieves its stored relia-bility state Qi from the experience pool to inform the current solution. We denote Et = {ΠL, Q (Π L)} as the retrieved experience set for xt. the final answer is generated by conditioning the LLM on the task input, the selected analytical paths, and its reliability state: 

at = fθ (xt, Et). (6) 

Experience Tree Evolution Finally, we address how expe-rience should be accumulated, reliability-calibrated through outcome feedback, and selectively merged or pruned through continual interaction with the environment to keep the tree compact, effective, and maintainable. Following the experience utilization process defined above, the model generates the answer at based on the query augmented with the selected experience path and its relia-bility. Once the corresponding environmental feedback be-comes available, ToE uses this feedback to evaluate the se-lected path and update the experience tree. After the task is completed, the system receives delayed feedback from the environment. The feedback is converted into an experience-level update signal: 

rt = ψτ (at, o t+h), (7) where at denotes the model output or action generated using the selected experience, ot+h denotes the delayed task out-come, and ψτ denotes the task-specific feedback function. For example, in the FinEvolveBench task, we use renv = atot+h

since predictive performance is evaluated by the information coefficient (IC). For all used experiences associated with this outcome, experience reliability is then updated according to an update mechanism. 

Q(e) ← UpdateQ ( Q(e), r t) , ∀e ∈ E t. (8) The appropriate reliability update mechanism may vary across tasks. We therefore present two representative im-plementations of UpdateQ( ·): a formula-based update and an LLM-based update. 

Formula-based update. Each experience e maintains a re-liability value Q(Et) ∈ [0 , 2q0]|E t|, where q0 denotes the neu-tral prior. The reliability value reflects the empirical validity of the experience and controls its activation strength during use. Positive environmental feedback increases the corre-sponding reliability dimensions, whereas negative feedback decreases them. Given delayed environmental feedback renv , the reliability of each attributed experience is updated as 

Q(Et) ← Q(Et) + η

1 −

 Q(Et)−q0

> q0

2

1 + log(1 + nhit ) · rt, (9) where η is a learning rate parameter, nhit is the historical usage count of experience e, and Et denotes the experi-ences attributed to the current outcome. The update mag-nitude is adaptive and proportional to the feedback strength. The usage-dependent denominator reduces the influence of individual feedback as evidence accumulates, while the boundary-aware factor produces larger updates near the neu-tral prior and smaller updates near the reliability bounds. Consequently, repeatedly ineffective experiences are grad-ually assigned lower activation strengths rather than being explicitly removed, yielding a form of soft forgetting. 

LLM-based update. Alternatively, an LLM-based updater can analyze the observed outcome and assign experience-specific update magnitudes according to each experience’s estimated contribution. This enables more fine-grained credit assignment, but may also introduce subjective biases from the LLM. 

Q(Et) ← f update 

> θ

 Et, Q(Et), renv 

. (10) Here, f update  

> θ

(·) denotes a prompt-based LLM updater whose behavior is constrained by predefined update rules encoded in the prompt. 

Maintenance. Here, we describe how ToE keeps the expe-rience tree compact and effective during continual updates. First, the generation of new nodes is tightly controlled in both quantity and quality, limiting unnecessary expansion at its source. Second, as part of its routine update pro-cedure, ToE retrieves semantically similar existing nodes through embedding-based search and employs a prompt-based LLM merger to determine whether some node should be merged. This strategy reduces redundancy arising from re-peated perspective construction, concurrent updates, and se-mantic overlap among sibling nodes. We do not prune experi-ences solely because their reliability falls below a predefined threshold, as low-reliability experiences may still provide useful negative evidence by identifying unreliable reasoning patterns and preventing repeated errors. In addition, each ex-perience maintains metadata Mi, including its recall count, hit count, node index, and creation timestamp. These statis-tics provide a foundation for more advanced metadata-aware experience maintenance, which we leave for future work. 

## Experiments 

We evaluate our method on two complementary tasks: Game of 24(Yao et al. 2023), and the FinEvolveBench (Deng et al. 2026). Game of 24 is a mathematical reasoning chal-lenge that requires combining four given numbers using basic arithmetic operations ( +, −, ×, / ) to obtain 24; for example, given 4 9 10 13, a valid solution is (10 − 4) × (13 − 9) = 24 .FinEvolveBench is a sentiment analysis benchmark, which is required to analyze temporally ordered financial news to predict future market sentiment for Chinese A-share industry indices. 

Experimental Setup 

We briefly introduce our experimental setup and include im-plementation details and more experimental results in the Appendix due to space limitations. Code is also included in the supplementary material. Our main experiments use DeepSeek-V4-Flash as the backbone model, with Qwen3.6-35B-A3B included as an additional backbone-model abla-tion. Compared methods. We compare ToE with three recent representative experience-based methods: Mem0 (Chhikara et al. 2025), MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b), and ReMe (Cao et al. 2026). On Game of 24, all methods use Tree of Thoughts (ToT) as the underlying reasoning procedure. We adopt experience-free ToT as the baseline and compare ToE with Mem0, MemRL, and ReMe. On FinEvolveBench, we use the benchmark-provided pipeline, denoted as Pipe , as the experience-free baseline, and compare ToE with Mem0 and MemRL.We exclude ReMe because its original day-level global extraction jointly processes all sector-level tra-jectories, causing substantial context redundancy and infer-ence overhead for long-form financial news. For example, aggregating 31 sector trajectories on September 1, 2025 pro-duced an input of approximately 324.5 K tokens, making direct evaluation impractical even with state-of-the-art long-context models. 

Evaluation metrics. On Game of 24, we report accu-racy to measure task performance and the average LLM calls to evaluate experience management efficiency. On FinEvolveBench, we follow the benchmark’s evaluation protocol and use cross-sectional IC (csIC) and time-series IC (tsIC) as the primary metrics (Deng et al. 2026). 

Performance on Game of 24 

As shown in Table 2, our method (ToT+ToE) achieves overall higher reasoning accuracy and efficiency compared with Mem0 (Chhikara et al. 2025), MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b), and ReMe (Cao et al. 2026). Notably, experience-management methods not specifically designed for complex reasoning underperform the experience-free ToT baseline on Game of 24, suggesting that poorly organized experience may hinder rather than facilitate reasoning. In contrast, ToE achieves an accuracy of 85.3%, outperforming ToT by 20.4 percentage points. This improvement suggests that ToE ef-fectively attributes outcomes to relevant reasoning perspec-tives, filters instance-specific details and ineffective search steps, and transfers reusable reasoning patterns across num-ber combinations. In terms of efficiency, ToT+ToE averages only 11.0 LLM calls per puzzle, representing a 78.7% reduction from the 51.7 calls required by ToT. This suggests that compact ex-perience paths guide the solution search toward promising directions while avoiding low-value branches. In contrast, ReMe, MemRL, and Mem0 require call counts comparable Method Accuracy ↑ Avg. Calls ↓

ToT (Yao et al. 2023) 64.9% 51.7 ToT+mem0 (Chhikara et al. 2025) 58.4% 53.8 ToT+MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b) 61.6% 51.2 ToT+ReMe (Cao et al. 2026) 61.1% 53.0 

ToT+ToE (ours) 85.3% 11.0 

Table 2: Performance and inference efficiency on the Game of 24. to the original ToT pipeline and thus yield no reduction in reasoning cost. Moreover, the number of LLM calls does not fully capture contextual overhead. In our implementation, ReMe intro-duces substantially longer experience contexts while retain-ing nearly the same number of calls, resulting in higher token consumption. This issue becomes more severe in the finan-cial setting, where each input already contains multiple long-form news articles. Therefore, under realistic inference-cost constraints, we do not include ReMe in the FinEvolveBench comparison. Overall, the Game of 24 results demonstrate that ToE jointly improves attributability, transferability, evolvability, and efficiency in a setting with a well-defined reasoning structure and deterministic feedback. 

Performance on FinEvolveBench 

Compared with the Game of 24, which has well-defined reasoning structures and deterministic feedback, FinEvolveBench presents a more challenging setting. Fi-nancial news can be interpreted from diverse and subjec-tive analytical perspectives, while market feedback is de-layed, noisy, and implicit. The results show that our method achieves the best overall performance across the evaluated metrics. Table 1 reports the tsIC results over 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day prediction horizons using two backbone LLMs: DeepSeek-V4-Flash and Qwen3-35B-A3B. We further divide the evaluation timeline into two phases: a Cold-Start phase and an Exploitation phase. The first one-third of the dataset is designated as the Cold-Start phase, during which the experience tree is still being constructed and its reliability estimates have not yet stabilized. The re-maining period is defined as the Exploitation phase, in which the experience tree has reached a meaningful scale and the DeepSeek-V4-Flash Qwen3.6-35B-A3B                                                       

> Method 10d 20d 40d 10d 20d 40d Exploitation Overall Exploitation Overall Exploitation Overall Exploitation Overall Exploitation Overall Exploitation Overall Pipe 0.0487 0.0243 0.0871 0.0517 0.0843 0.0595 0.0458 0.0349 0.0746 0.0676 0.0851 0.0677 Pipe+mem0 0.0393 0.0202 0.0608 0.0325 0.0762 0.0288 0.0379 0.0132 0.0567 0.0336 0.0747 0.0475 Pipe+MemRL 0.0473 0.0175 0.0449 0.0182 0.0671 0.0269 0.0159 0.0186 0.0356 0.0481 0.0266 0.0135 Pipe+ToE 0.0707 0.0313 0.1311 0.0741 0.1456 0.0899 0.0753 0.0322 0.1387 0.0749 0.1180 0.0753

Table 1: tsIC results over 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day prediction horizons during the Exploitation and Overall periods of FinEvolveBench, using DeepSeek-V4-Flash and Qwen3.6-35B-A3B as the backbone LLMs. DeepSeek Qwen Exploitation Overall Figure 3: tsIC results on FinEvolveBench across backbone models, exploitation stages, and prediction horizons. reliability updates have largely converged. We therefore re-port the tsIC results for the Exploitation phase as well as for the full dataset, denoted as Overall . Figure 3 presents a comparison of the key results, showing that ToE substantially outperforms Mem0 and MemRL across all settings. Compared with the Game of 24, where conventional ex-perience mechanisms only marginally affect reasoning ac-curacy, these methods perform substantially worse than the experience-free baseline on FinEvolveBench. When expe-rience is less transferable across instances and environmental feedback is more implicit, existing memory mechanisms can even substantially degrade performance. In contrast, our proposed ToE method improves the aver-age tsIC by 59.57% during the Exploitation phase and by 22.92% over the Overall period, yielding an average relative improvement of 41.24% across all 12 settings. Comparing the Exploitation-phase results with the Overall results, we observe consistently stronger performance during the Exploitation phase. This suggests that, after the initial cold-start phase in which the experience tree and reliability is still under construction, ToE achieves a more pronounced advantage over the competing methods. Moreover, ToE de-livers larger gains at the 20- and 40-day horizons, where the baseline itself exhibits stronger predictive performance. This suggests that ToE is particularly effective at identifying, ac-cumulating, and exploiting transferable predictive patterns when financial news contains more informative signals. The improvements are also consistent across backbone models. Relative to Pipe, ToE increases the tsIC by 48.61% under DeepSeek-V4-Flash and by 33.88% under Qwen3-35B-A3B on average, indicating that its effectiveness is not tied to a particular backbone. The only exception occurs in the 10-day Overall setting with Qwen3-35B-A3B, where ToE performs marginally worse than Pipe. Nevertheless, it still outperforms Mem0 and MemRL in this setting. The broad improvements across all remaining settings further suggest that ToE provides a more robust and transferable experience-management mechanism than existing memory-based alter-DeepSeek-V4-Flash Strategy tsIC csIC formula-based 0.0741 0.0528 

LLM-based 0.0598 0.0431 Table 3: Reliability update mechanism ablation on the 20-trading-day prediction horizon. natives. Taken together, these results highlight the central advan-tage of ToE: it enables more effective and robust experience utilization by organizing analytical perspectives within a uni-fied hierarchy, calibrating their reliability through outcome feedback, and selectively consolidating useful experience. 

Ablation Study on Reliability Update Mechanisms 

Table 3 compares two experience-update strategies on FinEvolveBench under the 20-trading-day prediction hori-zon. Both settings use the same experience-retrieval and pre-diction pipeline and differ only in how experience reliability is updated. The formula-based strategy corresponds to the Pipe+ToE configuration used in the main experiments and applies the update rule defined in Section . The LLM-based 

strategy instead prompts the LLM to directly adjust the re-liability score of each experience according to the observed feedback. The formula-based strategy outperforms direct LLM-based updating on both tsIC and csIC . This suggests that, on FinEvolveBench, translating implicit market feedback into constrained numerical reliability updates is more effective than fully relying on the LLM to revise experience reliability scores. Overall, the experiments support that, under the current FinEvolveBench setting, the effectiveness and stability of structured, formula-updated experience management, while the horizon ablation reveals that its benefits remain condi-tional on retrieval quality and prediction horizon. 

## Conclusion 

We present Tree-of-Experience (ToE), a structured experience-management framework that aligns experience organization with the hierarchical reasoning process of LLM agents. By representing analytical perspectives as tree nodes and calibrating their reliability through environmental feed-back, ToE supports fine-grained outcome attribution, sys-tematic experience updating, perspective-level transfer, and efficient retrieval. Experiments on Game of 24 show that ToE improves reasoning accuracy while substantially reduc-ing LLM calls. On FinEvolveBench, where task repetition is low and outcome feedback is delayed and implicit, existing memory mechanisms often provide inconsistent gains or even degrade performance. In contrast, ToE achieves an average 

tsIC improvement of 41.24 % across all evaluated settings and remains effective across different backbone LLMs. References 

Cai, Z.; Guo, X.; Pei, Y.; Feng, J.; Su, J.; Chen, J.; Zhang, Y.-Q.; Ma, W.-Y.; Wang, M.; and Zhou, H. 2025. Flex: Contin-uous agent evolution via forward learning from experience. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06449 .Cao, Z.; Deng, J.; Yu, L.; Zhou, W.; Liu, Z.; Ding, B.; and Zhao, H. 2026. Remember me, refine me: A dynamic proce-dural memory framework for experience-driven agent evo-lution. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , 16803–16822. Chhikara, P.; Khant, D.; Aryan, S.; Singh, T.; and Yadav, D. 2025. Mem0: Building Production-Ready AI Agents with Scalable Long-Term Memory. arXiv:2504.19413. Deng, Z.; Zhu, Y.; Wang, L.; Lu, J.; Wang, J.; Ran, C.; Yang, Y.; Yang, D.; and Shen, J. 2026. FinEvolveBench: A Bench-mark for Self-Evolving Agents on Low-Repetition Tasks with Implicit Rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06960 .Ding, R.; Cheng, W.; Shao, M.; and Zhao, C. 2026. Skillgen: Learning domain skills for in-context sequential decision making. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, 30512–30520. Fan, S.; Cong, X.; Zhang, Z.; Fu, Y.; Wu, Y.; Wang, H.; Zhang, X.; Hu, E.; and Lin, Y. 2026. Generalizing experience for language agents with hierarchical metaflows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 64103–64132. Lopez-Lira, A.; and Tang, Y. 2023. Can ChatGPT Forecast Stock Price Movements? Return Predictability and Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07619 .Mohan, S.; Mullapudi, S.; Sammeta, S.; Vijayvergia, P.; and Anastasiu, D. C. 2019. Stock Price Prediction Using News Sentiment Analysis. In 2019 IEEE Fifth International Con-ference on Big Data Computing Service and Applications ,205–208. IEEE. Shinn, N.; Cassano, F.; Gopinath, A.; Narasimhan, K.; and Yao, S. 2023. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Re-inforcement Learning. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 36: 8634–8652. Wang, M.; and Ma, T. 2024. MANA-Net: Mitigating Ag-gregated Sentiment Homogenization with News Weighting for Enhanced Market Prediction. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowl-edge Management .Wang, Q.; Xu, W.; and Zheng, H. 2018. Combining the Wis-dom of Crowds and Technical Analysis for Financial Market Prediction Using Deep Random Subspace Ensembles. Neu-rocomputing , 299: 51–61. Wei, J.; Wang, X.; Schuurmans, D.; Bosma, M.; Xia, F.; Chi, E.; Le, Q. V.; Zhou, D.; et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 24824–24837. Xia, P.; Chen, J.; Wang, H.; Liu, J.; Zeng, K.; Wang, Y.; Han, S.; Zhou, Y.; Zhao, X.; Chen, H.; et al. 2026. Skillrl: Evolving agents via recursive skill-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08234 .Yao, S.; Yu, D.; Zhao, J.; Shafran, I.; Griffiths, T.; Cao, Y.; and Narasimhan, K. 2023. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36: 11809–11822. Zhang, G.; Fu, M.; Wang, K.; Wan, F.; Yu, M.; and Yan, S. 2026a. G-memory: Tracing hierarchical memory for multi-agent systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 12988–13018. Zhang, S.; Wang, J.; Zhou, R.; Liao, J.; Feng, Y.; et al. 2026b. MemRL: Self-Evolving Agents via Runtime Re-inforcement Learning on Episodic Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03192 .Zheng, L.; Wang, R.; Wang, X.; and An, B. 2024. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar prompting with memory for com-puter control. In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , volume 2024, 19036–19066. Structured Experience Representation 

Table A1 illustrates the structured format used to store reusable financial-analysis experiences. Each experience contains a factor , an analysis direction , horizon-specific experience-reliability values, and selected maintenance metadata, including recall and hit counts and an experience identifier (EID). The factor and analysis direction together form a reusable reasoning path. The implementation maintains a separate re-liability value for the experience at each of the 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day horizons.The recall counts how often the complete experience path is retrieved as a candidate, rather than referring to the conventional evaluation metric. The hit 

is recorded only when the retrieved path is actually used for reasoning and receives environmental feedback; thus, the hit count does not exceed the recall count. The eid is a unique identifier for the complete root-to-leaf path, enabling consis-tent retrieval, tracking, and reliability updating. The examples show how an abstract analytical perspective is retained independently of any single news item, while its horizon-specific reliability is updated from delayed market feedback. 

Experimental Details 

Common experimental setup. Our main experiments use DeepSeek-V4-Flash as the primary backbone model. Qwen3.6-35B-A3B is used as an additional backbone-model ablation. The backbone models remain frozen during predic-tion and experience updating. The context-window size is set to 32,768 tokens. Unless otherwise specified, each method is independently run three times, and the reported results are averaged over the three runs. 

FinEvolveBench-specific experimental setup. The pre-diction horizons are 

H = {10 , 20 , 40 }, (A1) corresponding to 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day predictions. For a prediction made on date T , the model uses a five-day news window from day T − 4 to day T . Only target-industry news with an importance score of at least 8 is retained. The same news window and filtering rule are used for all com-pared methods. For each prediction horizon, we report results over two temporal evaluation periods: Overall and Exploitation . The 

Overall period covers the complete evaluation interval from January 2, 2025 to March 31, 2026. Let D = ( d1, . . . , d T ) denote the chronologically ordered list of trading days shared by all evaluated methods. The first one-third of these trading days, {d1, . . . , d ⌊T / 3⌋}, is de-fined as the Cold-Start period, during which the experience repository is still being constructed and its reliability esti-mates have not yet stabilized. The remaining trading days, 

{d⌊T / 3⌋+1 , . . . , d T }, constitute the Exploitation period. The same temporal boundaries are applied to all methods and all prediction horizons. The exact Overall start date, 

Overall end date, and Exploitation start date are explicitly recorded in the released evaluation configuration to ensure deterministic reproduction of the reported results. 

Hyperparameters And Implementation Details. Details in Game of 24. In Game of 24, an analytical per-spective is instantiated as the current subproblem state rather than as an independently verbalized conceptual label. Each state is represented by the canonicalized multiset of its re-maining numbers and serves as a node in the experience tree. For example, the state {1, 1, 10 , 12 } may be transformed into {2, 10 , 12 } by combining the two numbers 1, or into 

{1, 11 , 12 } by combining 1 and 10. These successor states represent different local analytical directions for continuing the solution. Accordingly, operator selection and number grouping are encoded implicitly by the transition from a parent state to one of its child states. A root-to-leaf reasoning path is represented as a sequence of progressively reduced number states, such as a four-number state, followed by a three-number state and then a two-number state. The successful solution suffix stored at a node records a previously validated continuation from the corresponding subproblem state and can be reused when the same or a sufficiently overlapping state is encountered again. In this task-specific implementation, retrieval first consid-ers an exactly matched canonical number state and may addi-tionally use number-set overlap to identify candidate reusable continuations. Every candidate continuation is checked by the deterministic arithmetic verifier before it is admitted into the reusable experience repository. Experience expansion therefore adds the successor states along a newly validated successful trajectory. States that are equivalent after number canonicalization share the same key and are consolidated into the same logical node rather than being stored as duplicate branches. Unlike FinEvolveBench, Game of 24 provides exact and deterministic environmental feedback. Given a problem in-stance xt and a generated continuation at, the task-specific reward is defined as 

rt = I [Verify( at, x t) = true] ∈ { 0, 1}, (A2) where Verify( ·) checks both the arithmetic correctness of the generated expression and whether the input numbers are used legally. The reliability-update operator in ToE is defined accord-ing to the feedback characteristics of the target task. For a general stochastic environment, a successful trace provides direct evidence that the selected experience path is feasible under the observed state, and its reliability is therefore im-mediately assigned the corresponding success reward. By contrast, an unsuccessful trace does not necessarily imply that the experience path is intrinsically invalid, since failure may arise from environmental stochasticity, noisy feedback, or imperfect downstream execution. We therefore apply a soft penalty to unsuccessful experiences rather than resetting their reliability to zero. 

Qnew (e) = 

(rt, if rt > 0,

(1 − ηtask )Qold (e) + ηtask rt, if rt ≤ 0.

(A3) Factor Analysis direction Selected impact horizons Recall/Hit EID Macroeconomy Pricing capacity utilization from aggregate-demand cycles [1.6602, 0.5981, 0.9529] 705/208 1049 Policy planning Supply-side administrative constraints and capacity-entry barriers [1.1205, 0.3548, 0.2004] 1125/602 1044 Geopolitics Geopolitical uncertainty, policy flexibility of oil-producing countries, and supply-side capacity disruptions [1.4600, 0.7345, 0.8703] 22446/13209 1040 

Table A1: Examples of structured experiences in financial sentiment analysis. For compact presentation, the table displays selected horizon-specific experience-reliability values. where ηtask ∈ [0 , 1] controls the strength of the reliability decay following an unsuccessful outcome. A larger ηtask 

assigns greater weight to the latest failure, whereas a smaller value preserves more of the historical reliability estimate. This asymmetric design treats success as positive evidence of path feasibility while interpreting failure as probabilistic negative evidence rather than definitive invalidation. In Game of 24, the outcome of a fixed state–continuation pair is deterministic: a mathematically valid continuation re-mains valid whenever the same canonical subproblem state is encountered, whereas an invalid continuation remains in-valid. Consequently, repeated observations are not required to estimate an uncertain success probability. We therefore set 

ηG24 = 1 , under which the reliability update collapses to 

Qnew (e) = rt ∈ { 0, 1}. (A4) Equivalently, 

UpdateQ G24 

 Qold (e), r t

 = rt. (A5) A verifier-confirmed continuation receives Q(e) = 1 and is admitted into the reusable experience repository. A con-tinuation that fails verification receives Q(e) = 0 and is immediately rejected rather than being stored as a reusable experience. Thus, the absence of persistent failed continu-ations is a consequence of the binary reliability criterion and the repository admission rule, rather than the absence of environmental feedback or reliability updating. This task-specific binary update differs from the reliability update used in FinEvolveBench. Financial outcomes are de-layed, noisy, and continuous, so a single observation cannot determine whether an analytical experience is intrinsically reliable. FinEvolveBench therefore retains graded reliabil-ity values and updates them incrementally across repeated environmental observations. In contrast, the exact verifier in Game of 24 causes the general task-dependent reliability update to collapse into a binary validity mapping after one observation. Accordingly, Game of 24 implements a deterministic, state-based specialization of ToE. Analytical perspectives, hierarchical reasoning paths, environmental calibration, ex-pansion, and consolidation are instantiated through canonical subproblem states, state transitions, verifier-confirmed solu-tion suffixes, and binary correctness feedback. 

Hyperparameters in FinEvolveBench. We use the fol-low hyperparameter settings across all experiments in FinEvolveBench. The experience-tree depth is set to L = 3 .The number of candidates retained at the first level is set to k1 = 8 , and the cosine-similarity threshold for leaf-level retrieval is set to λ = 0 .8.The initial experience-reliability value is set to q0 = 1 , and the learning rate for formula-based reliability updating is set to η = 10 . Each prediction horizon maintains a separate reliability value. Newly created experiences are initialized with reliability 1, and the reliability values are restricted to 

[0 , 2] .At most one new analysis direction is proposed in each adaptive expansion operation. The generated sentiment scores are restricted to [−1, 1] , and confidence scores are restricted to [0 , 1] .

Tree Representation and Decoupled Execution in FinEvolveBench. For FinEvolveBench, the Tree-of-Experience is organized into three hierarchical levels: in-dustry, factor, and analysis_direction. We adopt a path-based tabular representation in which each row corresponds to a complete root-to-leaf path. Rows sharing the same industry value form an industry-level subtree, while rows sharing the same (industry, factor) prefix form a factor-level subtree. The resulting CSV representation preserves the logical tree struc-ture through shared hierarchical prefixes, while supporting efficient subtree filtering, path insertion, and reliability up-dates without explicit parent pointers or nested node objects. Routing through the tree constitutes a hierarchical reason-ing process conditioned on the news content. The model first infers the industry to which the news is most relevant. Con-ditioned on both the news and the inferred industry, it then identifies the factor that best characterizes the underlying channel of influence. Finally, given the resulting (industry, factor) prefix, the model retrieves and selects analysis di-rections from the corresponding subtree. The three levels therefore form a logically dependent reasoning path rather than a set of independently observed labels. To accelerate large-scale experimentation, we decouple the execution of the first two reasoning stages from direction-level retrieval and final prediction. Specifically, the industry and factor decisions are inferred in advance from each news item and stored as an intermediate routing prefix. During the subsequent prediction stage, this cached prefix is used to locate the corresponding factor-level subtree, from which the model continues the reasoning process by selecting relevant analysis_direction nodes and incorporating their reliability states. This decoupled implementation does not remove or bypass the hierarchical reasoning involved in industry and factor selection. It only avoids repeatedly executing the complete three-stage routing chain within every prediction query. The logical dependency from news content to industry, from in-dustry to factor, and from factor to analysis direction remains unchanged; only the execution of the earlier reasoning stages is separated from the downstream prediction call and reused across experiments. 

Formula-based experience-reliability update in FinEvolveBench. In FinEvolveBench, nhit is defined as the historical news-level retrieval count of that experience. Experience reranking is performed independently for each retained news item, and nhit is incremented once whenever the experience is selected for one news item. Therefore, if the same experience is selected for five news items on the same prediction date, its hit count increases by five, even though these news items are subsequently aggregated into one industry-level prediction. Accordingly, nhit measures accumulated retrieval expo-sure at the news-item level. It does not denote the number of aggregated industry-level predictions, the number of pend-ing horizon-specific update records, or the number of times that delayed environmental feedback becomes available. The reliability of the selected experience path is updated as 

Qnew (e) ← Qold (e) + η

1 −

 Qold (e)−q0

> q0

2

1 + log(1 + nhit ) ⊙ renv . (A6) After updating, the experience-reliability values are clipped to [0 , 2] . The usage count reduces the update size for frequently used paths, while the boundary term prevents reliability values from changing too rapidly near the lower and upper limits. 

Fairness controls. All methods use the same backbone model, context-window size, news-processing pipeline, news window, importance-score threshold, prediction prompt, evaluation order, prediction horizons, feedback definition, and evaluation metrics. The experience-based methods use the same pre-test his-torical tasks for experience initialization. They also follow the same temporal constraints. Therefore, the main differences among these methods come from experience representation, retrieval, and updating. 

Data availability and reproducibility. The supplemen-tary material does not include the complete raw financial news corpus and market-price files because these data con-tain a large number of long-form news documents and high-frequency temporal records, whose total storage size sub-stantially exceeds the supplementary material size limit. Instead, the released package provides the complete method-specific implementation, including news-processing interfaces, hierarchical experience construction and storage, experience retrieval and merging, horizon-specific predic-tion, delayed reliability updating, and the evaluation scripts used to compute csIC and tsIC. It also specifies the required directory structure, input fields, prediction formats, evalua-tion horizons, temporal splits, and configuration parameters. Researchers can reproduce the reported experimental pro-cedure by organizing the corresponding benchmark data ac-cording to the documented input structure and running the supplied scripts and configurations. No additional undis-closed method-specific processing or evaluation procedure is required to reproduce the proposed method. 

Compared methods. We compare five main methods in RQ1 and RQ2. Except for Baseline, all methods use the same structured news annotations and prediction prompt. 

• Baseline : Following previous financial market prediction studies (Wang, Xu, and Zheng 2018; Mohan et al. 2019; Lopez-Lira and Tang 2023; Wang and Ma 2024), the LLM predicts a discrete sentiment value in {− 1, 0, 1}

for each retained news item. The importance-weighted average of the news sentiments from T − 4 to T is used as the industry sentiment prediction. This method does not use experience retrieval. 

• Pipe : The pipeline generates structured annotations, in-cluding importance scores and related industries. It ag-gregates target-industry news from T − 4 to T with an importance score of at least 8 and sends the news to the LLM prediction module. This method does not use expe-rience retrieval. 

• Pipe+mem0 : This method uses mem0 (Chhikara et al. 2025) for experience storage and semantic retrieval. The retrieved experiences and aggregated news are passed to-gether to the prediction module. 

• Pipe+MemRL : This method uses MemRL (Zhang et al. 2026b) for experience retrieval and updating. The re-trieved experiences are used during prediction, and the memory is updated after delayed feedback becomes avail-able. 

• Pipe+ToE (ours) : This method uses a depth-3 Tree-of-Experience. It retrieves an experience path through internal-level alignment and leaf-level adaptation. The selected experience and aggregated news are passed to the prediction module. Experience-reliability values are updated after delayed feedback becomes observable. 

Evaluation metrics. We use the information coefficient (IC) as the main evaluation metric. The task produces con-tinuous sentiment factors rather than categorical labels, so the predicted values are evaluated according to their correlation with future market returns. 

Cross-sectional IC (csIC) measures the correlation be-tween predicted sentiment values and future excess returns across industries on the same trading day: 

csIC t,h = Corr i (si,t,h , α i,t,h ) . (A7) The final csIC for horizon h is 

csIC h = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

csIC t,h . (A8) Time-series IC (tsIC) measures the correlation between predicted sentiment values and future excess returns across time for the same industry: 

tsIC i,h = Corr t (si,t,h , α i,t,h ) . (A9) The final tsIC for horizon h is 

tsIC h = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

tsIC i,h . (A10) 

Cross-Sectional Performance During Evolution 

Table A2 reports the evolution-stage csIC of the four pipeline-based methods over the 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day hori-zons. Pipe serves as the non-experience reference, while the other three methods augment the same prediction pipeline with different experience-management mechanisms. This comparison therefore focuses on whether experience re-trieval and evolution improve cross-sectional ranking beyond the structured prediction pipeline itself. Pipe+ToE achieves the highest csIC in all six backbone– horizon settings. With DeepSeek-V4-Flash, its csIC values are 0.0873, 0.1210, and 0.1371 for the 10-, 20-, and 40-day horizons, respectively. With Qwen3.6-35B-A3B, it obtains 0.0834, 0.1221, and 0.1055. The consistent advantage across both backbone models indicates that the hierarchical organi-zation and reliability-aware evolution of ToE provide more robust medium- and long-horizon experience augmentation than flat semantic retrieval or alternative memory updating. DeepSeek-V4-Flash Qwen3.6-35B-A3B 

Method 10d 20d 40d 10d 20d 40d Pipe 0.0534 0.0837 0.0589 0.0456 0.0600 0.0674 Pipe+mem0 0.0524 0.0623 0.0682 0.0413 0.0525 0.0611 Pipe+MemRL 0.0542 0.0344 0.0356 0.0219 0.0467 0.0064 Pipe+ToE 0.0873 0.1210 0.1371 0.0834 0.1221 0.1055 

Table A2: Exploitation-stage csIC across the 10-, 20-, and 40-trading-day horizons. 

Prompt Templates 

For reproducibility, we present the three LLM prompt tem-plates used in our implementation: experience reranking and adaptive expansion, experience merging, and experience-conditioned sentiment prediction. Runtime inputs are rep-resented by placeholders enclosed in braces. 

Experience reranking and adaptive expansion. The reranking prompt selects historical analytical perspectives that are applicable to the current news. If no suitable ex-perience exists, the prompt may propose one new analysis direction. 

Experience merging. When a newly proposed direction is highly similar to an existing experience, the merging prompt determines whether the two experiences should be combined. 

Experience-conditioned sentiment prediction. The pre-diction prompt combines the selected experiences with the target-industry news. It outputs a reasoning chain, a key factor, horizon-specific sentiment scores, and a confidence score. Example Prompt for Experience Reranking and Adaptive Expansion ROLE 

You are a senior quantitative researcher and experience-ranking expert, focusing on selecting the analytical perspectives from historical analysis experiences that best match the current news event. 

TASK 

You will receive: 

1. One or more news items , including their dates and importance. 

2. A set of historical analytical experiences , each containing factor , analysis_direction , and impact scores for different horizons. Determine whether the analytical perspective of each historical experience is applicable to sentiment judgment for the current news, and output the eid s of the top-K most relevant experiences in descending order of relevance. 

PROPOSING A NEW ANALYSIS DIRECTION 

If the analytical perspectives in all historical experiences are unsuitable for the current news, you may propose a new analysis direction. The new direction must satisfy the following constraints: 

1. Format requirement. 

analysis_direction must use the format “From the perspective of [an intrinsic property of the factor].” Example: “From the perspective of how the discount rate anchors the valuation of capital-intensive assets.” The analysis_direction must describe an intrinsic-property dimension or pricing-interpretation perspective through which the factor acts on the target industry. 

2. Conclusion-free expression. 

Provide only a logical perspective for reasoning. Do not include directional conclusions such as price increases, price decreases, bullish effects, or bearish effects. 

3. Entity-free expression. 

Do not include specific assets, countries, institutions, or exact indicator values. Use abstract industrial and financial terminology. 

4. Impact horizon. 

The impact_horizon fields represent the reliability of the experience over different time windows. Values must lie in 

[0 .0, 2.0] . When uncertain, use the initial value 1. Even when a new analysis direction is proposed, ranked_eids must still be returned and may be an empty list. Only one new perspective may be proposed each time. 

RUNTIME INPUT 

{news_content} {historical_analytical_experiences} 

OUTPUT REQUIREMENT 

Return a single JSON object directly. Do not include additional explanatory text or Markdown code-block markers.                 

> {"ranked_eids": [eid1, eid2, ...], "proposed_new_directions": [{"analysis_direction": "From the perspective of [an intrinsic-property dimension of the factor]", "impact_horizon_10d": 0.0, "impact_horizon_20d": 0.0, "impact_horizon_40d": 0.0 }]}

Here, ranked_eids contains only experiences that are applicable to the current task. proposed_new_directions is used only when no existing experience is suitable. 

Table A3: Example prompt for experience reranking and adaptive expansion. Example Prompt for Experience Merging ROLE 

You are an experience-quality reviewer responsible for determining whether a newly proposed experience should be merged with an existing experience. 

CORE PRINCIPLES 1. Analysis-direction format. 

analysis_direction must use the format “From the perspective of [an intrinsic property or logical exposure of the factor]” and must not contain a directional market conclusion. 

2. Experience reliability. 

Each impact_horizon_xd field represents the reliability of the experience over the corresponding time window. Values must lie in [0 .0, 2.0] .

TASK 

The system intends to add a new experience but has identified a highly similar existing experience in the same industry context. Decide whether the new experience should be merged with the existing experience or retained independently. 

DECISION CRITERIA Merge when the two analysis directions describe the same or highly complementary analytical dimension. 

Do not merge when they describe different analytical dimensions and retain independent value. 

RUNTIME INPUT                             

> Industry: {l1name} New experience: -analysis_direction: {new_analysis_direction} -factor: {new_factor} -impact_horizon_10d: {new_impact_10d} -impact_horizon_20d: {new_impact_20d} -impact_horizon_40d: {new_impact_40d} Similar existing experience: -eid: {existing_eid} -analysis_direction: {existing_analysis_direction} -factor: {existing_factor} -impact_horizon_10d: {existing_impact_10d} -impact_horizon_20d: {existing_impact_20d} -impact_horizon_40d: {existing_impact_40d} -life: {existing_life}

OUTPUT REQUIREMENT 

Return a single JSON object directly. Do not include additional explanatory text or Markdown code-block markers. The 

reason must be concise.                    

> {"should_merge": true |false, "reason": "A concise justification for the decision", "merged_analysis_direction": "From the perspective of [a unified intrinsic-property dimension]", "merged_impact_horizon_10d": 0.0, "merged_impact_horizon_20d": 0.0, "merged_impact_horizon_40d": 0.0 }

The merged analysis direction must retain the required format, and all merged horizon-specific reliability values must remain in [0 .0, 2.0] .

Table A4: Example prompt for experience merging. Example Prompt for Experience-Conditioned Sentiment Prediction ROLE 

You are a senior quantitative researcher specializing in event-driven strategies and industry-factor modeling for the Chinese A-share market. You are skilled at converting unstructured financial news into quantitative signals. 

TASK 

Analyze the news summary for the given industry and assess the event’s sentiment direction and logical transmission strength over the next 1, 5, 10, 20, and 40 trading days. 

HISTORICAL EXPERIENCE GUIDANCE 

If historical analytical experiences are provided before the news in the form “[From the perspective of ...],” use their 

analysis_direction s and horizon-specific impact values when constructing the logic_chain .Each impact value lies in [0 .0, 2.0] and represents the reliability of the experience over the corresponding horizon. It has no directional meaning and does not itself indicate positive or negative sentiment. 

RUNTIME INPUT 

{target_industry} {historical_analytical_experiences} {news_summary} 

OUTPUT REQUIREMENT 

Return a single JSON object directly. Do not include additional explanatory text or Markdown code-block markers. The JSON object must contain: 

1. logic_chain : a causal analysis of how the news is transmitted to the target industry. 

2. key_factor : the most important driver, summarized in no more than 10 words. 

3. sentiment_score : continuous scores in [−1.0, 1.0] for all five horizons. 

4. confidence_score : confidence in the analysis, with a value in [0 .0, 1.0] .             

> {"logic_chain": "A detailed causal transmission chain", "key_factor": "The dominant driver", "sentiment_score": {"horizon_10d": 0.0, "horizon_20d": 0.0, "horizon_40d": 0.0 }, "confidence_score": 0.0 }

Table A5: Example prompt for experience-conditioned, horizon-specific sentiment prediction.