Title: NN-OpInf: an operator inference approach using structure-preserving composable neural networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.08488v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 02:28:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
## NN-OpInf: an operator inference approach using structure-preserving composable neural networks 

Eric Parish a, Anthony Gruber b, Patrick Blonigan a, Irina Tezaur a

> aSandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA, USA
> bSandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, USA

Abstract 

We propose neural network operator inference (NN-OpInf): a structure-preserving, composable, and minimally restrictive operator inference framework for the non-intrusive reduced-order mod-eling of dynamical systems. The approach learns latent dynamics from snapshot data, enforc-ing local operator structure such as skew-symmetry, (semi-)positive definiteness, and gradient preservation, while also reflecting complex dynamics by supporting additive compositions of heterogeneous operators. We present practical training strategies and analyze computational costs relative to linear and quadratic polynomial OpInf (P-OpInf). Numerical experiments across several nonlinear and parametric problems demonstrate improved accuracy, stability, and robustness over P-OpInf and prior NN-ROM formulations, particularly when the dynam-ics are not well represented by polynomial models. These results suggest that NN-OpInf can serve as an effective drop-in replacement for P-OpInf when the dynamics to be modeled contain non-polynomial nonlinearities, offering potential gains in accuracy and out-of-distribution per-formance at the expense of higher training computational costs and a more difficult, non-convex learning problem. 

1. Introduction 

Data-driven model order reduction (MOR) remains an important tool for enabling many-query analyses of high-fidelity and high-cost computational simulations. Broadly speaking, such reduced-order models (ROMs) separate into two categories based on whether they require direct access to the high-fidelity full-order model (FOM) code: intrusive and non-intrusive. Intrusive reduced-order models (ROMs), such as Galerkin projection using proper orthogonal decomposition (POD-Galerkin) and least-squares Petrov–Galerkin (LSPG) [6], directly project the FOM governing equations onto a “maximally expressive” reduced-subspace identified from data. Ideally, this projection process drastically reduces the computational cost in exchange for a small amount of approximation error. While effective, these methods rely on access to the FOM operators, and their intrusive nature can be prohibitive for certain types of codes where this access is not practical. 

1.1. Related work 

Non-intrusive ROMs address the aforementioned challenge by constructing ROMs using “snapshot” data alone, i.e., instantaneous samples of representative FOM solutions at various parameter values. Non-intrusive model reduction methods typically have two steps. First, and similar to intrusive ROMs, a low-dimensional subspace is identified from high-fidelity snapshot data via, e.g., the POD [3]. Second, the snapshots are projected onto this low-dimensional    

> Email address: ejparis@sandia.gov (Eric Parish)
> Preprint submitted to Elsevier March 10, 2026
> arXiv:2603.08488v1 [cs.LG] 9 Mar 2026

subspace and a model for the latent dynamics is learned via a regression procedure. The choice of latent space dynamics model to be learned plays a critical role in the accuracy of a non-intrusive ROM. Polynomial Operator inference (P-OpInf or simply OpInf) [43], a particularly popular non-intrusive model reduction technique, enforces these dynamics to be polynomial in the reduced state. This structure is motivated by the observation that many models arising in computational physics can be written in a polynomial form; examples include linear elasticity, the shallow water equations, and the Euler equations. Imposing polynomial structure on the latent space dynamics simplifies the inference process to a convex least-squares problem and further enables guarantees on the inferred operators under certain conditions. For example, in the case of a polynomial-based FOM, the P-OpInf ROM can exactly recover the intrusive Galerkin ROM via targeted snapshot collection procedures such as “re-projection” [42] and “exact” OpInf [47]. A myriad of extensions to P-OpInf have been proposed since [43]. The so-called “Lift and learn” [45] approach was introduced as a systematic framework for learning ROMs in augmented state spaces to mitigate non-polynomial non-linearities. P-OpInf was formulated for partial differential equations in [44] from a function space viewpoint. Structure-preserving P-OpInf approaches were proposed for Hamiltonian systems [51, 53, 28, 29], Lagrangian systems [49, 50], energy-conserving systems [31, 23], and systems with gradient structure [21]. Recently, methods to couple subdomain-local P-OpInf ROMs with other subdomain-local P-OpInf ROMs and/or full-order models to improve predictive accuracy and robustness have been explored [52, 39, 46, 22, 15]. While the original P-OpInf relied on interpolation to handle parametric dependence, more efficient extensions to “affine” systems have also been proposed [38, 53]. Under the affine parametric assumption, FOM dynamics are linear in a known nonlinear function of the parameters, leading to effective P-OpInf ROMs which retain convexity of the learning problem. While P-OpInf has seen success, many systems of practical interest do not admit a polyno-mial model form. Common examples include finite deformation solid mechanics, the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations, and fluid flow with reacting gases. While lifting proce-dures [45] provide an approach to circumvent this issue in certain situations, an exact transfor-mation does not always exist, or it may be infeasible to derive. Non-affine parametric depen-dence is also common in the form of exponential or rational nonlinearities involving both states and parameters. In these circumstances, P-OpInf methods with affine parametric dependence have limited accuracy due to their strong inductive bias, and it is desirable to have a higher capacity inference method for learning latent space dynamics. To that end, many works have replaced the global polynomial approximation in P-OpInf with a kernel surrogate or artificial neural network. For example, San et al. [48] examined a neural-network-based surrogate modeling approach similar to operator inference and demonstrated it on Burgers’ equation. The approach em-ployed POD for dimension reduction and fully connected neural networks to learn the one-step dynamics mapping between POD coefficients supplemented with problem-relevant parameters; the time coordinate and Reynolds number were used for the viscous Burgers’ equation example. Two network architectures were considered in [48]: a “sequential net” that directly targeted the POD coefficients at the next step, and a “residual net” that targeted the difference between the POD coefficients from one step to the next, which can be viewed as an explicit Euler up-date. This is related to the approach taken in [18], which uses two deep neural networks in sequence: an encoder-decoder to produce an informative latent space, followed by a dynamics predictor which handles future latent state prediction. Since this procedure is highly sensitive to the network architecture used, a comparison of various encoder-decoder architectures was presented in [25]. These works demonstrated that residual-based neural networks can lead to ROMs capable of out-performing Galerkin projection. However, comparisons were not made 2with polynomial-based OpInf [43], which can also outperform Galerkin projection in certain circumstances. Furthermore, these approaches did not embed any physical structure within the ROM. A similar neural-network-based effort was proposed in Gao et al. [20], where neural net-works were used to learn a right-hand side operator with the goal of bypassing hyper-reduction in intrusive model reduction Unlike the works [48, 18], which learn the mapping from one time step to another, Gao et al. directly target learning the right-hand side “velocity” operator for the reduced model. POD is again used for dimension reduction and training data for the neural network comprises snapshot data of the right-hand side operator evaluated about the FOM solution projected onto the POD subspace. The proposed approach was demonstrated on two different problems: Burgers’ equation with non-affine parametric dependence and a nonlinear convection-diffusion-reaction system based on a premixed H2-air flame model. Para-metric variation and convergence with basis dimension were considered. Results showed that the neural-network formulation tended to outperform hyper-reduced intrusive ROMs based on the discrete empirical interpolation method (DEIM) [9], particularly for lower basis dimensions. Gao et al. further observed that the NN-ROM formulation did not exhibit “deep convergence” for large numbers of basis vectors and stagnated at relative errors of around 1%; the NN-ROMs became an order of magnitude less accurate than DEIM-based ROMs and several orders of mag-nitude less accurate than non-hyper-reduced ROMs for higher basis dimensions. Comparisons were not made to polynomial-based operator inference approaches. To remedy some of these deficiencies, the related work [12] considered replacing the right-hand velocity operator with a kernel surrogate instead of a neural network, demonstrating that this class of approximators compares favorably to P-OpInf in various non-polynomial cases of interest. Neural ODEs [10] (NODEs) comprise another body of work similar to OpInf. In NODEs, a neural network is trained to learn the right-hand side of a dynamical system. Unlike P-OpInf, however, the network is typically trained on state data using the backpropagation of gradient information through time. This training approach can improve the reliability of the network, but drastically increases training cost. Parameterized NODEs, which learn a parameterized right-hand side, were considered in [34]. We additionally note that Ref. [54] considers traditional P-OpInf models learned using backpropagation through time (referred to as rollouts), which showed an improved training accuracy. The flexibility of neural networks has also enabled many fruitful techniques for physical structure-preservation, including Hamiltonian neural networks and their generalizations [24, 14, 13], Lagrangian neural networks [11, 17], and metriplectic neural networks [35, 27, 26], to name a few. Numerous other variations on these themes exist in the literature. Park et al. [41] pro-pose the “thermodynamics-informed latent space dynamics identification” (tLaSDI) approach, based on their previous LaSDI approach of the same name [19]. In tLaSDI, nonlinear di-mension reduction is used to identify the latent states, and a GENERIC formalism informed neural network [57] (GFINN) is used to construct a thermodynamics-preserving latent dynamics surrogate. Hesthaven and Wang et al. [30, 54] propose a neural-network-based non-intrusive model reduction approach for both steady [30] and transient systems [54] with parameteriza-tions. Their approach employs POD for dimension reduction and designs a feed-forward-neural network that maps input parameters (and time in the case of transient systems) to the target reduced coefficients. 

1.2. Our contributions 

This work introduces a structure-preserving, composable, minimally restrictive, and non-intrusive framework for the model reduction of dynamical systems. The proposed neural network operator inference (NN-OpInf) approach is motivated by fundamental limitations of existing operator inference methodologies and advances the state of the art in several ways. 3First, as previously discussed, many systems of practical interest do not admit a polynomial operator structure, limiting the utility of traditional P-OpInf approaches. To address this limitation, NN-OpInf uses generic feed-forward neural networks capable of representing general nonlinear operators. While prior studies have also explored NN-based operator inference [48, 20], this work is distinguished in its modular approach: we introduce novel neural architectures with prescribed algebraic structure, which can be additively composed to improve learning stability and expressiveness. Second, discretizations of many governing equations yield operators with intrinsic mathe-matical structure, such as skew-symmetry, (symmetric) positive definiteness, and the property of being an exact derivative (gradient structure). This implicitly encodes physical consequences including dynamical stability, conservation laws, and dissipation inequalities. Since preserving this structure in ROMs can be essential for robustness, interpretability, and accuracy, we tailor NN-OpInf to structure-preserving discretizations. Besides offering generic vector- and matrix-valued surrogates, we implement skew-symmetric, symmetric positive-definite, and gradient operators, enabling NN-OpInf ROMs that explicitly respect these key properties by construc-tion. Third, we emphasize modularity: while individual operators in a full-order model (FOM) may exhibit distinguished algebraic structure, the fully discretized system rarely admits a global physical characterization in terms of this structure. For example, hyper-elastic solid mechan-ics models typically combine symmetric positive definite stiffness operators with unstructured forcing and boundary condition operators, precluding monolithic structure-preserving formula-tions based on, e.g., global Hamiltonian dynamics. To overcome this limitation, we propose a composable operator inference paradigm in which the NN-OpInf reduced model is expressed as an additive sum of learned operators. Each operator can enforce its own distinct mathematical structure, accept different inputs, and employ a tailored neural architecture. This composability enables flexible yet principled reduced-order modeling of complex systems that would otherwise be inaccessible to existing approaches. Fourth, to support the development, training, and deployment of NN-OpInf models, we de-veloped NN-OpInf [1], an open-source software package for constructing, training, and deploying composable, structure-preserving neural-network operator inference models. The package pro-vides a modular API built around variables, operators, and models, enabling users to mix and match heterogeneous operators in a single ROM. We provide utilities for data handling, loss construction, and training. We hope that this software will encourage further work in this area. Lastly, we provide a comprehensive assessment of the accuracy of the proposed NN-OpInf approach on a range of nonlinear and parametric problems. We assess convergence with basis dimensions and predictive accuracy within both reproductive and predictive regimes. We com-pare NN-OpInf with both intrusive ROMs and P-OpInf models; to our knowledge, we provide the first systematic comparison between neural-network-based and polynomial-based operator inference methods across multiple problem classes. The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 introduces the full-order model, notation, and problem setup. Section 3 reviews projection-based ROMs, summarizes polynomial OpInf, and introduces a baseline neural-network OpInf formulation. Section 4 presents the proposed NN-OpInf framework, including structured operators and training considerations. Section 5 analyzes computational costs and problem convexity. Section 6 reports numerical experiments across a range of nonlinear and parametric problems. Finally, Section 7 concludes and outlines perspectives. 42. Full-order model 

We consider non-intrusive reduced-order modeling of first- and second-order dynamical sys-tems in this work. For simplicity of presentation, the approach is now presented in the context of the first-order system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) ˙x (t, μ) = f (x(t, μ), μ), (2.1) supplemented with appropriate initial conditions x0(μ) := x(0 , μ). In the above, x : [0 , T ]×D → 

RN is the state, μ ∈ D ⊂ RNμ are system parameters, t ∈ [0 , T ] is the time coordinate, and 

f : RN ×D → RN is the right-hand side operator. We use the notation ˙ x = ddt x. The FOM (2.1) is assumed to arise, for example, from the semidiscretization of a system of partial differential equations (PDEs), so that N ≫ 0 is large and (2.1) is expensive to simulate. While we do not explicitly consider the case where the operator f has exogenous inputs, this setting can be addressed with straightforward modifications to what follows. 

3. Model reduction 

Our objective is to develop a ROM for the FOM (2.1) of the form ˙ˆx (t, μ) = ˆf (ˆ x(t, μ), μ), (3.1) where ˆ x : [0 , T ] × D → RK is the reduced state of dimension K ≪ N and ˆf : RK × D → RK

is the “reduced” velocity. Classic model reduction methods follow an offline-online paradigm, where comparatively expensive operations offline are used to dramatically reduce simulation costs online. In the offline stage, a low-dimensional trial space for the state is constructed from full-order simulation data, i.e., snapshots of x at various time and parameter instances. This trial subspace is then used to build a ROM via projection (e.g., an intrusive Galerkin ROM) or inference (e.g., an OpInf ROM). In the online stage, the resulting reduced-order model is queried to generate fast approximate solutions for new testing configurations. 

3.1. Reduced basis approximation 

Many popular ROM methods generate approximate solutions ˜ x(t, μ) ≈ x(t, μ) to the FOM ODE (2.1) by restricting the state at time t ∈ [0 , T ] to a trial subspace V of dimension K ≪ N 1.These so-called reduced basis methods often consider an approximation ˜ x ∈ V ⊂ RN to the full-order state, where dim( V) = K. The most common approach for constructing V is POD [3], which assumes access to a set of snapshots corresponding to realizations of the state at Nt time instances for Ntrain parameter realizations. Collecting these data into a global snapshot matrix, 

X = [ Xμ1 , · · · , XμNtrain ] ∈ RN ×NtNtrain , (3.2) where 

Xμi = [ x(t1; μi), · · · , x(tNt ; μi)] ∈ RN ×Nt ,

POD identifies a K-dimensional trial subspace V = span V described by an orthonormal basis matrix V ∈ RN ×K that minimizes the projection error, minimize  

> V⊺V=I

X − VV ⊺X 2 

> F

,

> 1We note the use of an affine trial subspace is also common.

5where | · | F denotes the Frobenius matrix norm. This optimization problem is classical and can be effectively solved via the singular value decomposition of the snapshot matrix X, yielding the POD approximation 

Vˆx(t, μ) = ˜ x(t, μ) ≈ x(t, μ), (3.3) where ˆ x : [0 , T ] × D → RK is the reduced state, i.e., the coordinates of the approximation ˜ x in the basis V.

3.2. Intrusive Galerkin projection and motivation for operator inference 

Given a reduced basis, many common intrusive model reduction approaches employ Galerkin projection. The Galerkin ROM is constructed by (1) inserting the approximation (3.3) into the FOM ODE (2.1) and (2) restricting the residual to be orthogonal to the spatial trial subspace 

V. This process yields the reduced system ˙ˆx(t, μ) = V⊺f  Vˆx(t, μ), μ. (3.4) This process results in a K-dimensional system that is variationally consistent 2 with the original FOM. We refer to the system (3.4) as the Galerkin ROM. While the Galerkin ROM is effective in numerous circumstances, it has several drawbacks that motivate OpInf approaches. First, it is intrusive: simulation of (3.4) requires access to the FOM operator f , which is often impractical for, e.g., legacy or commercial codes. Second, the reduction in system dimension enabled by Galerkin projection does not always yield a re-duction in computational cost, particularly in non-polynomially nonlinear systems. Specifically, computing the right-hand side of the Galerkin ROM (3.4) requires a series of steps. First, evalu-ation of the N -dimensional state via the basis matrix V, reduced state ˆ x, and the reference state 

xref . Next, computation of the N -dimensional velocity operator f . Finally, computation of the matrix-vector product V⊺f . Unfortunately, all of these operations scale with FOM dimension N

and are computational bottlenecks for the ROM. Hyper-reduction techniques [2, 9, 55, 16, 7, 8] have been devised to address these bottlenecks, but typically result in less accurate ROMs due to their use of additional (potentially variationally inconsistent) approximations in the gov-erning equations. On the other hand, non-intrusive model reduction approaches can address both of these issues by pre-supposing a scalable model form and fitting the constituent opera-tors to data. Note that such non-intrusive approaches can remain advantageous even when an alternative intrusive approach is available, due to their ability to bypass hyper-reduction [20]. 

3.2.1. Operator inference 

Non-intrusive ROMs circumvent the aforementioned challenges by constructing a ROM from snapshot data alone. Arguably, the most popular non-intrusive ROMs are based on P-OpInf [43], which is a three-step procedure. First, a reduced basis is constructed as in intrusive model reduction. Then, an ansatz (or ersatz) for the functional form of the ROM is made in terms of learnable operators. Finally, an inference problem for these operators is solved to obtain a non-intrusive ROM. Assuming a quadratic functional form for the state dynamics, a generic P-OpInf ROM takes the form ˙ˆx(t, μ) = ˆA(μ)ˆ x(t, μ) + ˆH(μ) sqr  ˆx(t, μ) + ˆ c(μ) (3.5) where sqr encodes the s = K(K + 1) /2 unique terms in the symmetric Kronecker square of its argument: sqr  ˆy = [ˆ y1 ˆy1, ˆy2 ˆy1, ˆy2 ˆy2, ˆy3 ˆy1, ˆy3 ˆy2, ˆy3 ˆy3, ˆy4 ˆy1, · · · , ˆyN ˆyN ]⊺ ∈ Rs.

> 2i.e., projection of the FOM solution satisfies the ROM equations

6Here, ˆA : D → RK×K is a reduced matrix modeling the linear dependence of the dynamics on the state, ˆH : D → RK×s models quadratic dependence of the dynamics on the state, and ˆc : D → RK models a potentially parameter-dependent constant forcing. Note that higher-order polynomial nonlinearities are applicable but omitted here for brevity. Operator inference requires training data in the form of state snapshots, along with a dictio-nary of parameters and time coordinates associated to them. Accommodating parametric vari-ation in the polynomial operators is not trivial but can be handled in several ways. In the initial work [43], parametric dependence was handled by solving a P-OpInf problem for each parameter realization and forming an interpolant of the learned operators. In subsequent years, different approaches have been proposed for handling “affine” parametric dependence [38, 56, 53], where the operators depend linearly on a known nonlinear function of the parameters. For simplicity, the present work considers the former interpolatory case. To this end, along with the Ntrain 

snapshot matrices given in Eq. (3.2), we assume access to the associated parameter realizations μ1, . . . , μNtrain 

, as well as to (possibly approximate) snapshot data of the state velocity at these same temporal and parametric indices, ˙Xμi ≈ [ ˙ x(t1; μi), · · · , ˙x(tNt ; μi)] ∈ RN ×Nt , i = 1 , . . . , N train .

In practice, the approximate derivatives ˙Xμi are often obtained by numerically differentiating the states in Xμi , but in some cases they may be directly available from the high-fidelity FOM solver. With these data, P-OpInf is a two-step procedure for inferring the polynomial operators in (3.5). First, the training snapshot matrices are projected into the reduced space, i.e., for 

i = 1 , . . . , N train ,ˆXμi = V⊺Xμi ∈ RK×Nt , ˙ˆXμi = V⊺ ˙Xμi ∈ RK×Nt .

Then, Ntrain optimization problems are solved to obtain the reduced operators ˆOμi = {ˆcμi , ˆAμi , ˆHμi }

for each parameter realization μi, i = 1 , . . . , N train ,minimize 

> ˆOμi
> Nt

X

> j=1

ˆAμi ˆXμi 

> j

+ ˆHμi sqr   ˆXμi

> j

 + ˆ cμi − ˙ˆXμi 

> j
> 22

+ p λ, ˆOμi , (3.6) where we use ˆXμi 

> j

to denote the jth column of ˆXμi and the same for ˙ˆXμi . The term p(λ, ˆOμi ) ∈

R+ is a penalty function (e.g., Tikhonov regularization) depending on input parameter λ ∈ R+

that provides regularization and enhances stability. 3 After solving the problems (3.6), global operators for ˆA, ˆH, and ˆ c are formed via interpolation, and equation (3.5) is solved for new parameter instances μ not seen during training. 

3.3. Vanilla OpInf with neural networks 

While the P-OpInf just described is relatively fast to execute and has been effective as a data-driven ROM for numerous systems, its assumption of polynomial structure and interpolatory treatment of parametric dependence limits its expected accuracy in many cases of practical interest. Neural network-based OpInf approaches can, in theory, address this challenge. Neural networks employ repeated function composition to create nonlinear input–output maps, providing a straightforward approach to mitigate the limited capacity of P-OpInf for 

> 3We note that it is possible to have multiple regularization parameters in P-OpInf. This is particularly true for higher-order P-OpInf models, wherein you can have a different regularization parameter for each operator. We omit this here for brevity.

7non-polynomial systems. A direct extension of the previous P-OpInf to this setting replaces the polynomial ansatz in (3.5) with a neural network (ˆ x, μ) 7 → ˆf that maps reduced states (and, when relevant, parameters) to the reduced velocity. In this “vanilla” NN-OpInf formulation, the reduced dynamics are modeled as ˙ˆx(t, μ) = ˆ g(ˆ x, μ; w), (3.7) where ˆ g(ˆ x, μ; w) := ˆf (ˆ x, μ) is a standard feed-forward neural network with trainable weights 

w. The model is trained by minimizing a regression loss between the network outputs at the given state data and the corresponding reduced snapshot of the time derivative. More precisely, the (optionally regularized) inference problem becomes minimize 

> w
> Ntrain

X

> i=1
> Nt

X

> j=1

ˆg  ˆXμi 

> j

, μi; w − ˙ˆXμi 

> j
> 22

+ p(λ, w). (3.8) This formulation provides substantially higher expressive power than P-OpInf, but has the drawback of yielding a generally non-convex optimization problem that can be difficult to solve. This vanilla NN-OpInf formulation aligns with the approach proposed in [20], which employed deep neural networks for inference and highlighted that accuracy can stagnate for larger basis dimensions (limiting “deep convergence”). This work did not compare the neural network approach to well-studied P-OpInf approaches. Thus, the comparative performance of NN-OpInf to P-OpInf in realistic ROM scenarios remains an unaddressed question. 

4. NN-OpInf: Neural-network operator inference 

Inspired by previous OpInf work, we propose NN-OpInf as a structure-preserving, compos-able alternative to P-OpInf for generic nonlinear problems. Under this framework, the reduced right-hand side ˆf is represented as a sum of operator blocks, each with a targeted structure and input dependence. While a myriad of works have investigated the use of neural networks for dynamics regression in contexts similar to OpInf [20, 48], such as the above “vanilla” NN-OpInf formulation, these methods typically model the right-hand side dynamics operator with a single neural network ˆ g. This results in black-box models which are difficult to train, interpret, and analyze, resulting in inaccurate and potentially unstable models in practice. These challenges are addressed by our NN-OpInf framework for non-intrusive model re-duction in the following ways. First, the universal approximation property of neural networks ensures that NN-OpInf is capable of approximating models with non-polynomial non-linearities. Second, NN-OpInf is modular and can produce operators with key structural properties includ-ing symmetry and definiteness, leading to the preservation of important physical invariants (e.g., global conservation laws) in the ROM. We will show that this embedded structure and flexibility results in ROMs that are easier to train and more accurate and robust than past NN-based efforts. The NN-OpInf framework has several distinguishing factors. Similar to P-OpInf, we make an ansatz that the reduced velocity ˆf is described by a summation of independent terms, ˙ˆx(t, μ) = 

> M

X

> r=1

ˆgr(ηr; wr), (4.1) where ˆ gr(·, ·) ∈ RK , r = 1 , . . . , M are operators with trainable parameters wr and inputs 

ηr ≡ ηr(ˆ x, μ) ⊆ span (ˆ x, μ) comprising some pre-specified combination of the reduced state ˆ x

and the parameters μ depending on the problem to be modeled. However, we employ operators 8ˆgr that (i) are potentially parameterized to enforce a specific algebraic structure, e.g., skew-symmetry, (ii) can be linear or nonlinear in both the state and parameters, and (iii) can have different numbers of inputs and different levels of complexity (e.g., number of learnable param-eters). Additional details of these parameterizations will be discussed in subsequent sections. At training time, the parameters {w1, . . . , wM } of (4.1) are inferred by solving a regularized minimization problem of the form minimize 

> w1,..., wM
> Ntrain

X

> i=1
> Nt

X

> j=1
> M

X

> r=1

ˆgr



ηr

  ˆXμi 

> j

, μi

; wr



− ˙ˆXμi

> j
> 22

+ p (λ, w1, . . . , wM ) . (4.2) The modular structure (4.1) for the NN-OpInf ROM is motivated by the observation that many discretizations of physical systems result in right-hand side operators that are comprised of a summation of different terms, e.g., a diffusion term, an advection term, and a body forcing term. Furthermore, while the entire right-hand side dynamics operator often does not have any noteworthy algebraic structure, its constituent parts do. For example, a diffusion operator is symmetric positive definite in the presence of appropriate boundary conditions. Of course, a clear drawback of the NN-OpInf formulation (4.1) is that the optimization problem (4.2) is considerably more difficult to solve than the linear least-squares problem (3.6) associated with P-OpInf, since it can be nonlinear, is generally non-convex for nonlinear oper-ators, and will almost certainly have no closed form solutions. Fortunately, advances in opti-mization algorithms, automatic differentiation, and software have made problems such as (4.2) relatively tractable. However, it is important to note that the additive decomposition (4.1) is not unique: different combinations of operator blocks can yield the same aggregate right-hand side, complicating training and interpretability in the absence of regularization or additional structural constraints. Despite this, we find that the NN-OpInf ROM (4.1) can be effectively trained via (4.2) using off-the-shelf methods, leading to a simple and effective alternative to P-OpInf when this additional flexibility is desired. 

4.1. Operators 

A key enabling concept in NN-OpInf is the use of operators ˆ gr that are parameterized to enforce specific algebraic properties. As a concrete example, consider a neural-network-based operator that is parameterized to be symmetric positive semi-definite (SPSD): ˆx 7 → ˆg(η; w)ˆ x, ˆg(η; w) = ˆL(η; w) ˆL⊺(η; w), (4.3) where ˆL(·) is a lower triangular matrix (diagonal included) that is the output from a feed forward neural network with learnable weights w. By construction, the matrix ˆK = ˆL ˆL⊺

is (1) symmetric positive semi-definite and (2) is potentially nonlinear in both the state and parameters. However, we note ˆL is not unique: any orthogonal matrix R satisfying R⊺ = R−1

leads to the same operator ˆK = ( ˆLR )( ˆLR )⊺ = ˆL ˆL⊺.Parameterizations like (4.3) can be used to construct a wide variety of linear and nonlinear operators. These operators can range in complexity from a linear operator that is affine in its input parameters to a deep neural network parameterization of a skew-symmetric matrix that is nonlinear in both the state and input parameters. Table 1 summarizes a subset of operators that we consider, including SPSD operators, skew-symmetric operators, and potential function operators. 

4.2. Pragmatic approaches to increase robustness 

Neural network training problems such as (4.2) are known to be highly dependent on the choice of hyper-parameters, data normalization, optimization strategy, etc. We have found these sensitivities can occasionally degrade the performance of the inferred models. Here, we outline several practical strategies to improve robustness. 9Table 1: Subset of operators used in NN-OpInf.                                        

> Name Expression Description
> Standard N(η;w)Fully connected neural network mapping reduced in-puts to the reduced velocity. This is the most flexible, least constrained operator and serves as the baseline NN-OpInf formulation in [20]. Matrix ˆA(η;w)ˆ xA generic matrix-valued network function acting on the reduced state. SPSD ˆL(η;w) ˆL(η;w)⊺ˆxA Cholesky-inspired product of lower-triangular ma-trix operators enforcing symmetry and positive (semi-) definiteness. Designed to yield dissipative dynamics consistent with energy decay in homogeneous systems. Skew  ˆS(η;w)−ˆS(η;w)⊺ˆxStrictly lower-triangular matrix operator (uniquely) enforcing skew-symmetry by construction, leading to energy-preserving dynamics in the absence of forcing. Vector c(μ) or c(η;w)Operator representing an additive offset or forcing term. Used to represent constant inputs or purely para-metric forcing independent of the reduced state. SPSD Potential ∇ˆxL(ˆ x),
> L(ˆ x) = ˆ x⊺ˆA(η;w)ˆ x
> ˆA(η;w) = ˆL(η;w) ˆL(η;w)⊺
> Gradient-based model computed with automatic dif-ferentiation and derived from a scalar potential built from an SPSD operator. The resulting dynamics can be used to enforce Lagrangian structure and guarantee the conservation of energy.

4.2.1. Optimization approach 

In P-OpInf, the inference problem can be solved using linear least-squares methods due to the polynomial structure of the inferred operators. This is not the case for the present approach due to the use of nonlinear parameterizations, which render the resulting optimization non-convex. Note that this can even be the case for linear operators when additional structure is enforced. For example, inference for the Cholesky parameterization of an SPSD linear operator is not convex. First-order stochastic gradient descent (SGD)-based approaches, such as ADAM optimiza-tion, offer standard algorithms for training neural-network models. SGD scales well with increas-ing data and has been empirically shown to enhance generalization performance and mitigate the effect of local minima when training NN models. However, stochastic first-order methods neglect curvature information in the loss landscape and can encounter convergence problems; past works have found it difficult to obtain “deep” convergence with OpInf for neural-network-based approaches for non-intrusive learning [20]. To partially mitigate the slow convergence and lack of scale-invariance associated with SGD, we employ a simple, pragmatic hybrid op-timization approach that utilizes the L-BFGS and SGD implementations readily available in PyTorch. As described in Algorithm 1, the approach interleaves nlbfgs L-BFGS steps with nf

steps of ADAM. The motivation behind this alternating strategy is to use L-BFGS to quickly reach a local minimum, followed by ADAM to “escape” this minimum and further drive down the loss. An additional advantage of this approach is its effectiveness for linear and mildly nonlinear model architectures, which can result in convex optimization problems with a global minimizer. We emphasize that, while we have observed this approach to be more robust than a uniform ADAM optimization, L-BFGS typically assumes full-batch gradient evaluations and enforces an SPD Hessian approximation, which can limit its effectiveness for large-scale, non-convex optimization problems. Investigation of more sophisticated optimization algorithms, such as stochastic SR1 [36], will be a topic of future work. 10 Algorithm 1 Training Algorithm with L-BFGS and Adam  

> 1:

Input: Number of epochs nepochs , L-BFGS frequency nf , number of BFGS steps nlbfgs  

> 2:

for epoch = 0 to nepochs do  

> 3:

if epoch % nf = 0 then  

> 4:

for j = 1 to nlbfgs do  

> 5:

do lbfgs  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

do adam  

> 9:

end for 

4.2.2. Weight normalization 

To encourage convergence, we also employ a simple ℓ2 weight normalization (equivalently, a Tikhonov regularization) on the network parameters, which can be implemented directly as weight decay in the optimizer. In our experiments, this normalization has a relatively small impact on performance and robustness, especially compared to the much stronger sensitivity to normalization observed in standard P-OpInf. 

4.2.3. Data normalization 

For data-normalization we employ a max-abs normalization strategy for the state and its (approximate) time derivative. For the max-abs strategy, the inputs and response are normalized by their maximum absolute value across the training set. To describe this mathematically, let ˆXtrain = V⊺Xtrain ∈ RK×ntrain denote the projection of the training snapshots onto the span of the reduced basis, where Xtrain denotes the training data matrix obtained after a training/ validation split on the snapshot data ˆX. These projected data are scaled by ˆX∗ 

> train

= ˆXtrain 

max 



abs   ˆXtrain 

 ,

and the same scaling is applied for the target response (e.g., reduced velocity). As opposed to standard normalization, i.e., shifting the feature/response by its mean and scaling by its standard deviation, we have found the max-abs strategy to be preferable for several reasons. First, a max-abs normalization strategy ensures that the algebraic structure imposed on the normalized operators is the same as the structure on the non-normalized operators. Moreover, it does not suffer from common pitfalls of component-wise normalization. Focusing on the normalization of the response, we note that component-wise normalization strategies disrupt the hierarchical structure of the POD coefficients and break the equivalence between norms in the reduced and full spaces. Specifically, for two vectors x, y ∈ range ( V) and an orthonormal basis, it is straightforward to show the distance between the reduced and full vectors is the same, i.e., 

∥x − y∥2 = V⊺x − V⊺y 2.

Employing a component-based normalization strategy disrupts this equivalence and limits a physical interpretation of the loss function. 

4.2.4. Ensembling 

Lastly, we have found ensembling during NN training to be a simple and effective tool to further improve robustness and performance. In an ensemble formulation, multiple models are trained independently, and their predictions are averaged at inference time. To describe this, let {ˆg(η; w(m))}Lm=1 denote L independently trained NN-OpInf operators (e.g., different 11 random initializations, minibatch orderings, training/validation splits). We define the ensemble prediction of the operator as the uniform average ˆg(η; w) = 1

L

> L

X

> m=1

ˆg(m) η; w(m). (4.4) At inference time, we evaluate the reduced-order dynamics using the averaged right-hand side above. Note that ensemble averaging reduces variance and mitigates sensitivity to a particular training realization. Moreover, it is a simple linear transformation of the outputs, and is there-fore compatible with any of the algebraic structures enforced by our network parameterizations. In practice, we have found that even small ensembles ( M = 2) can substantially improve per-formance. We note that more sophisticated ensembling approaches are possible, including ones that yield uncertainty estimates [32]. 

4.3. Software implementation in NN-OpInf 

We developed an open-source Python software package, NN-OpInf [1], to support training and deployment of the described models. The package is built on PyTorch and organized around three core abstractions—variables, operators, and models—that provide a thin, composable layer over standard PyTorch modules. The variable class encapsulates the data and normalization strategy for each input and output quantity, such as the reduced state ˆ x, parameters μ, or reduced velocity ˆf . Variables store training snapshots and metadata (size and name), and expose a normalization strategy. During training, we perform a standard randomized train/validation split, apply the requested normalizer (e.g., max-abs or abs scaling), and return normalized tensors together with the scaling factors for inverse transforms. This is the mechanism used to normalize both inputs and outputs prior to solving the regression problems described in Section 4. The operator layer implements the structured building blocks introduced in Table 1. Each operator is a PyTorch nn.Module with a forward method that consumes a dictionary of named inputs (e.g., 

inputs[’x’] , inputs[’mu’] ) and returns the operator evaluation and potentially its Jacobian. The model class is a lightweight container that aggregates a list of operators and evaluates their sum to produce the reduced right-hand side. The model also propagates input/output scalings to each operator and provides a utility for saving learned operators to disk. This design allows heterogeneous operator blocks (different inputs, architectures, and structures) to coexist in a single ROM. Training is handled by a small set of utilities in nnopinf.training . The default settings in-clude ADAM optimization with optional LBFGS acceleration, weight decay for ℓ2 regularization, learning-rate scheduling, and periodic checkpointing. The training loop constructs mini-batches from normalized data, evaluates the model forward pass, and minimizes a relative mean-square error objective consistent with (4.2). Gradients are computed via PyTorch’s automatic differen-tiation, so backpropagation through the operator graph is handled automatically. This makes it straightforward to prototype, insert, and evaluate new operator parameterizations by defining a new nn.Module with a forward method. We additionally note that, while not considered in the present work, it is straightforward to modify the training framework to utilize backpropagation in time for dynamics-constrained training. Below is a short example using nnopinf to construct and train a model with an SPSD term and an additive forcing term:           

> import nnopinf import nnopinf . operators as operators import nnopinf . models as models import nnopinf . training as training

12 x_var = nnopinf . Variable ( size = rom_dim , name = " x " , normalization_strategy = " MaxAbs " ) mu_var = nnopinf . Variable ( size = n_params , name = " mu " , normalization_strategy = " MaxAbs " ) y_var = nnopinf . Variable ( size = rom_dim , name = " y " , normalization_strategy = " MaxAbs " ) x_var . set_data ( x_snapshots ) mu_var . set_data ( mu_snapshots ) y_var . set_data ( xdot_snapshots ) spd_op = operators . SpdOperator ( acts_on = x_var , depends_on =( x_var , mu_var ) , n_hidden_layers =2 , n_neurons_per_layer =64 , positive = True , )forcing_op = operators . VectorOffsetOperator ( n_outputs = rom_dim ) model = models . Model ([ spd_op , forcing_op ]) settings = training . get_default_settings () training . train ( model , variables =[ x_var , mu_var ] , y = y_var , training_settings = settings ) 

5. Analysis 

This section summarizes computational and optimization considerations for the proposed NN-OpInf framework. We first compare the dominant FLOP counts for structured operators against standard linear and quadratic OpInf models, and then consider training costs. A sum-mary of these costs is provided in Table 2. We conclude with a brief discussion of the convexity properties of NN-OpInf optimization problems. We consider the non-parametric case in what follows. 

5.1. Computational cost (online evaluation) 

We compare the dominant FLOP counts for evaluating different reduced operators, focusing on the dependence on the reduced dimension K.

Linear OpInf. Evaluating a linear OpInf model requires a matrix–vector product Aˆx, with cost (neglecting linear-in-K terms) 

Clinear ≈ 2K2.

Quadratic OpInf. For the quadratic model (3.5), the quadratic term requires forming sqr  ˆx

and multiplying by ˆH. The resulting cost is 

Cquadratic ≈ K3 + 32 K2,

which scales cubically in K.

Linear SPSD operator. For an SPSD operator of the form ˆLˆL⊺ ˆx, where ˆL is lower triangular, the evaluation cost is two triangular matrix–vector products: 

CSPD ≈ K2,

since each triangular product costs K2/2 + O(K) FLOPs. Note that this cost assumes the iterative application ˆL(ˆL⊺ ˆx), as opposed to explicitly forming ˆA = ˆLˆLT (which would be 

O(K3)). 13 Linear Skew operator. For a skew-symmetric operator 

ˆS − ˆST



ˆx with ˆS strictly lower trian-gular, the evaluation cost is also two triangular products: 

Cskew ≈ K2.

As with the SPSD operator, this is quadratic in K.

NN-OpInf added cost. In NN-OpInf, the total cost includes the neural-network forward pass used to produce, e.g., ˆL or ˆS. For a fully connected network with nh hidden layers, nn neurons per layer, and activation cost no,a , the forward-pass FLOPs for input dimension nin and output dimension nout are 

CNN = 2 nnnin + no,a nn + nh

 2n2n + no,a nn

 + 2 nnnout ,

assuming no activation on the output layer. The output dimension depends on the operator: 

nout ≈



K standard (vector) operator ,K2 matrix operator ,K(K + 1) /2 SPSD operator (lower-triangular output) ,K(K − 1) /2 skew operator (strictly lower-triangular output) .

The operator application then adds the quadratic-in-K terms above. For the choice nn = K,

nh = 3, and nin = K used in most numerical examples later in this work, this simplifies to 

CNN = 8 K2 + 4 no,a K + 2 Kn out .

This cost is cubic in K for the matrix, SPSD, and skew operators. The total cost of the NN OpInf operator then adds cost of the application of the operator to the state, as described above. We write this as 

CNN −OpInf = CNN + Capply ,

where Capply is, e.g., K2 for an SPSD operator. 

SPSD potential operator. Lastly, for an SPSD potential operator defined by ˆf = ∇ˆxL(ˆ x) with 

L(ˆ x) = ˆ xT ˆA(ˆ x)ˆ x and ˆA = ˆLˆLT , the forward pass first evaluates ˆL (via an NN) and applies two triangular products to form ˆAˆx. The scalar potential then adds a single inner product. If ˆA is treated as fixed with respect to ˆ x, the gradient reduces to 2 ˆAˆx and the cost matches the SPSD operator, i.e., CSPSD-Potential ≈ K2 (plus the NN cost to produce L). When A depends on ˆ x, the full gradient includes additional terms from ∂ ˆA/∂ ˆx. In practice this is computed with reverse-mode autodifferentiation. For standard dense layers in PyTorch, the backward pass typically costs about twice the forward pass. Let CSPSD NN denote the NN cost for the SPSD operator (i.e., using nout = K(K + 1) /2). A representative complexity is 

CSPSD-Potential ≈ CSPSD NN + 2 CSPSD NN + O(K2)so CSPSD-Lag ≈ 3CSPSD NN + O(K2). Figure 1 summarizes the resulting operator cost ratios relative to linear and quadratic OpInf as a function of K for an assumed network structure ( nh = 3 , n n = K, and no,a = 1). We find that the NN-OpInf models are substantially more expensive than linear P-OpInf. When compared to quadratic P-OpInf, we find that the SPSD, Skew, and SPSD-Potential NN-OpInf operators all display similar scaling to quadratic OpInf. A standard dense neural network can be more efficient, as it avoids the K3 scaling. We emphasize that, while NN-OpInf ROMs are more expensive than P-OpInf, they provide a more expressive modeling approach that can capture generic non-linearities. 14 10 20 30 40 50 60 K     

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100 Cost ratio
> Relative to linear OpInf
> NN-OpInf-Standard / Linear NN-OpInf-SPSD / Linear NN-OpInf-Skew / Linear SPSD-Potential / Linear
> 10 20 30 40 50 60 K
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7Cost ratio
> Relative to quadratic OpInf
> NN-OpInf-Standard / Quadratic NN-OpInf-SPSD / Quadratic NN-OpInf-Skew / Quadratic SPSD-Potential / Quadratic
> Operator cost ratios (n hidden=3, n neurons=K)

Figure 1: Operator evaluation cost ratios relative to linear and quadratic OpInf baselines as a function of reduced dimension K = K, assuming nh = 3, nn = K, and no,a = 1 (RELU). 

5.2. Computational cost (training) 

We now contrast the training cost of NN-OpInf with P-OpInf. We do not include the costs of projecting data onto the reduced subspaces, as these costs are equivalent in both approaches. For NN-OpInf, we consider a model comprising only a single right-hand side operator, and do not account for extra cost of, e.g., hyper-parameter tuning in either method, which typically adds a constant multiplier to the total cost. Let NtNtrain denote the total number of snapshot pairs used for training and nepochs the number of epochs. 

P-OpInf (linear/quadratic). P-OpInf training reduces to a series of linear least-squares problems with p unknown coefficients per output component. For example, p = K for a linear operator while p = K(K + 1) /2 for a quadratic operator. This inference problem is decoupled across output components, so the total cost is K independent least-squares solves with the same design matrix but different right-hand sides. A representative scaling on the cost for a QR- or normal-equation-based least-squares solve is 4

COpInf train = O K  NtNtrain p2 + p3 ,

where the first term corresponds to forming normal equations (or an equivalent QR factorization) and the second term to solving the resulting system. Note that this training process is one-shot: the cost is incurred only once. While the training cost is cheap for small K, we do note poor scaling with the ROM dimension, particularly for quadratic operators, in which case training goes as O(K7). 5

NN-OpInf. NN-OpInf is trained with iterative gradient-based methods, and the cost is dom-inated by one forward pass and one backward pass. Using the forward-pass cost CNN-OpInf 

(defined earlier as the sum of CNN and Capply ) and the standard estimate that the backward pass is about twice the forward pass, a representative per-sample cost is 3 CNN-OpInf . Thus a representative total training cost is 

CNN-OpInf train ≈ 3NtNtrain nepochs CNN-OpInf .

Figure 2 summarizes the resulting training-cost ratios relative to linear and quadratic P-OpInf baselines as a function of K, assuming nepochs = 10 ,000, nh = 3, nn = K, and NtNtrain = 10 ,000 

> 4

We note that Ref. [43] approximates the cost as O(KN p 3), which is conservative. 

> 5

This cost can be reduced to be O(K6) through repeated factorizations of the data matrix. 

15 10 20 30 40 50 60 K     

> 10 4
> 10 5
> Training cost ratio
> Relative to linear OpInf
> NN-OpInf-Standard / Linear NN-OpInf-SPD / Linear NN-OpInf-Skew / Linear SPSD-Potential / Linear
> 10 20 30 40 50 60 K
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Training cost ratio
> Relative to quadratic OpInf
> NN-OpInf-Standard / Quadratic NN-OpInf-SPD / Quadratic NN-OpInf-Skew / Quadratic SPSD-Potential / Quadratic
> Training cost ratios (n epochs=10000, n hidden=3, n neurons=K)

Figure 2: Training cost ratios relative to linear and quadratic P-OpInf baselines as a function of reduced dimension 

K, assuming nepochs = 10 ,000, nh = 3, nn = K, and NtNtrain = 10 ,000 snapshot pairs. 

snapshot pairs. We observe that NN-OpInf incurs orders of magnitude higher cost than P-OpInf for small basis dimensions. This increase in cost highlights one of the main tradeoffs of NN-OpInf: a potential increase in accuracy at the expense of an oftentimes sharp increase in offline training cost. We note that this increase in cost becomes more balanced with respect to quadratic P-OpInf as K grows, due to the poor scaling noted above. 

5.3. Structure of the NN-OpInf problem 

NN-OpInf results in optimization problems that are nonconvex in general. However, linear parameterizations of the considered operators can retain convexity, and we summarize these properties here. We consider state-linear parameterizations with no parametric dependence in what follows. Consider reduced snapshot pairs {(xℓ, yℓ)}Ns

ℓ=1 , with xℓ, yℓ ∈ RK , and define the objective 

J(A) = 

NsX

ℓ=1 

∥Ax ℓ − yℓ∥22, A ∈ RK×K . (5.1) Let Xdata = [ x1, . . . , xN ] ∈ RK×Ns and ydata = [ y⊺

1 , . . . , y⊺

Ns ]⊺ ∈ RNsK . Using the “vec trick” vec( AX data ) = ( X⊺

data ⊗ I) vec( A),

we can write the OpInf optimization problem (neglecting regularization) as 

J(A) = ∥(X⊺

data ⊗ I) vec( A) − ydata ∥22, (5.2) which is convex (quadratic) in the vectorized variable vec( A) ∈ RK2

.

Proposition 5.1 (Convex linear-operator cases) . For the objective J(A), each of the following optimization problems is convex: (i) min A∈RK×K J(A) (unconstrained linear operator), (ii) min S∈L sl J(S − S⊺) (skew-symmetric operator with Lsl the strictly lower-triangular matri-ces), (iii) min A=A⊺, A⪰0 J(A) (SPSD operator). Proof. Case (1) has a convex feasible set and convex objective. In case (2), the map S 7 → S − S⊺

is linear and Lsl is a linear subspace, so J(S − S⊺) is convex in S. In case (3), the feasible set is the intersection of the symmetric subspace and the PSD cone, hence convex. Therefore, all three problems are convex [4]. 16 Table 2: Summary of dominant computational costs in the analysis section. Here Ns = NtNtrain . For NN-operator costs, we assume nn ∝ K, and nin = K.

Category Model/operator Dominant cost 

Online evaluation Linear OpInf O(K2)Online evaluation Quadratic OpInf O(K3)Online evaluation SPSD O(K2)Online evaluation Skew O(K2)Online evaluation Standard NN O(K2)Online evaluation Matrix NN operator O(K3)Online evaluation SPSD NN operator O(K3)Online evaluation Skew NN operator O(K3)Online evaluation SPSD potential O(K3)Training P-OpInf (linear) O NsK3 + K4

Training P-OpInf (quadratic) O NsK5 + K7

Training NN-OpInf (Standard NN) O Ns nepochs K2

Training NN-OpInf (Matrix NN operator) O Ns nepochs K3

Training NN-OpInf (SPSD NN operator) O Ns nepochs K3

Training NN-OpInf (Skew NN operator) O Ns nepochs K3

Training NN-OpInf (SPSD potential) O Ns nepochs K3

Remark 5.1 (When convexity is lost) . Linear and nonlinear parameterization of A can destroy (strong) convexity. For example, enforcing A ⪰ 0 via A = LL ⊺ gives an objective that is generally nonconvex in L. Likewise, enforcing skew symmetry via A = S − S⊺ introduces non-uniqueness and loss of strong convexity unless S is restricted (e.g., strictly lower triangular). Neural-network operators. In the full NN-OpInf setting, operators depend nonlinearly on train-able weights, so the least-squares objective is nonconvex. In addition, the additive decom-position in (4.1) is generally non-unique, so multiple parameter settings can produce similar right-hand side dynamics. 

6. Numerical experiments 

We now assess the performance of the proposed NN-OpInf on a suite of numerical exper-iments, comparing against (1) the NN ROM models proposed in Ref. [20] (which we refer to as “NN-OpInf-NN”), (2) linear and quadratic P-OpInf ROMs, and, where possible, (3) an in-trusive (non-hyper-reduced) POD-Galerkin ROM. Table 3 summarizes the ROMs considered in this section. For all NN-OpInf ROMs, the available data are separated randomly in a standard 80/20 training/validation split. Each layer is initialized with PyTorch’s default initialization (Kaiming Uniform for dense linear layers). Unless otherwise noted, the networks employ 3 layers, and the number of hidden units per layer is set to be the ROM dimension, K. We use an ensemble size of L = 2. The networks are trained with the ADAM optimizer for 10000 epochs and a batch size of 50. We accelerate training by performing 50 LBFGS iterations with a line search twice: at the start and after 5000 epochs. The initial learning rate is 5 × 10 −3 with a learning-rate decay parameter of 0 .9998, meaning that the learning rate is  5 × 10 −3 × (0 .9998) n after the n-th epoch. The networks are ReLU-activated, and ℓ2 regularization is employed with a penalty parameter of 1 × 10 −6. While not shown, we note that the sensitivity of NN-OpInf to regularization hyperparameters was found to be mild. This contrasts with P-OpInf ROMs, which are notoriously sensitive to the choice of hyperparameter. 17 Table 3: Summary of models used in the numerical experiments. 

Name Description Implementation 

POD-Galerkin Intrusive POD ROM (no hyper-reduction) In-house P-OpInf-A Linear P-OpInf model OpInf [37] P-OpInf-AH Quadratic P-OpInf model OpInf [37] P-OpInf-cA Linear P-OpInf with affine forcing OpInf [37] P-OpInf-cAH Quadratic P-OpInf with affine forcing OpInf [37] NN-OpInf-NN Standard NN operator from Table 1 NN-OpInf [1] NN-OpInf-SS Skew-symmetric NN operator NN-OpInf [1] NN-OpInf-PSD −1×(Skew operator + SPSD operator) NN-OpInf [1] NN-OpInf-PSD-f NN-OpInf-PSD + vector forcing operator NN-OpInf [1] NN-OpInf-SPSD SPSD NN operator NN-OpInf [1] NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential SPSD potential operator NN-OpInf [1] All P-OpInf models are implemented using the OpInf Python package [37]. We consider four P-OpInf models in the following experiments: linear P-OpInf (P-OpInf-A), quadratic P-OpInf (P-OpInf-AH), linear P-OpInf with an affine forcing (P-OpInf-cA), and quadratic OpInf with an affine forcing (P-OpInf-cAH). We follow Ref. [38] for selecting standard ℓ2 regularization parameters via a grid search: for each candidate regularization value, a corresponding ROM is trained and subsequently evaluated to determine the best-performing model with respect to the ℓ2 error measured across the training data. Our grid search considers 40 values for λ on a logarithmic scale from 1 × 10 −8 to 1 × 10 3. For higher-order P-OpInf ROMs, the linear and quadratic terms share the same regularization parameter. In the parametric setting, we use the interpolatory OpInf approach of [43], which is implemented in the OpInf Python package. All ROMs are assessed using the ℓ2 relative state error summed over all time steps, 

e =

PNt 

> i=1

∥xOpInf (ti; μ) − xFOM (ti; μ)∥2

PNt 

> i=1

∥xFOM (ti; μ)∥2

.

6.1. Burgers equation 

We first consider the one-dimensional Burgers’ equation on the periodic domain x ∈ [0 , 2π], 

∂u ∂t + 12

∂u 2

∂x = 0 ,

subject to the initial condition u(x, 0) = 0 .025(sin(4 x) + 2 cos(6 x)) + 2. This initial condition results in an advecting wave with small disturbances that grow in time. In the absence of shocks, Burgers’ equation conserves energy, ddt 

R 2π 

> 0

u(x)2dx = 0. The FOM is discretized with 500 spatial grid points and an energy-conserving symmetric flux for the convective term. Integration in time is performed with a fourth-order Runge-Kutta (RK4) scheme using ∆ t = 0 .01 and snapshots are collected at every time step. Note that this problem is quadratic in the state u, and therefore a quadratic P-OpInf is expected to perform well. To construct an NN-OpInf ROM that satisfies the energy conservation constraint, we parameterize the right-hand side with a skew-symmetric operator, ˆf (ˆ x, μ) = 

h ˆS(ˆ x, μ; w) − ˆS(ˆ x, μ; w)

i

ˆx. (6.1) We refer to this formulation as NN-OpInf-Skew-Symmetric (NN-OpInf-SS). Two setups are considered, both of which remain shock-free: 

• Reproductive: We collect snapshots and make predictions over t ∈ [0 , 4]. 18 • Future-state prediction: We collect snapshots over t ∈ [0 , 1] and predict over t ∈ [0 , 4]. Figure 3 summarizes results for the reproductive and future-state cases. Figures 3a and 3b report relative error versus basis dimension, Figures 3c and 3d show the final-time solutions, and Figures 3e and 3f quantify energy-conservation violations. Across both configurations, NN-OpInf-SS consistently outperforms the baseline NN-OpInf-NN. While we do not observe convergence with increasing basis dimension, the relative error is low (around 0 .1%) in all cases. In the reproductive setting, NN-OpInf-SS is competitive with P-OpInf, while in the future-state configuration it outperforms both linear and quadratic P-OpInf. The skew-symmetric param-eterization preserves energy at the semi-discrete level, which improves stability and predictive consistency in the future-state setting. We observe that both P-OpInf-A and P-OpInf-AH do a reasonable job at preserving energy throughout the training time window, but yield energy violations for future-state predictions. Note that recent work introduces quadratic P-OpInf approaches capable of preserving energy as well [31, 23]; we do not examine these here but highlight that, in NN-OpInf, energy-preservation is easily embedded via the skew-symmetric parameterization. 

6.2. Nonlinear convection-diffusion-reaction system 

We next consider a nonlinear convection-diffusion-reaction (CDR) system with multiple terms and non-polynomial nonlinearities, which highlights the expressiveness and composability of NN-OpInf. The governing equations on the domain Ω := [0 , 1] × [0 , 1] with t ∈ [0 , 2.5] are given by ∂u ∂t = −u (b · ∇ u) − σu exp( −ηu 2) + ν∇2u + q, 

with homogeneous initial and boundary conditions. The forcing term q = 5 exp( −r) with 

r = p(x1 − 0.5) 2 + ( x2 − 0.5) 2, and the parameters are defined on σ ∈ U [2 , 3], ν ∈ U [1 ×

10 −5, 1 × 10 −3], b = [0 .5 cos( θ), 0.5 sin( θ)] with θ ∈ U [ π 

> 6

, π 

> 2

], η ∈ U [1 , 3]. The FOM is discretized with 100 × 100 spatial grid points. A second-order upwind scheme is used for the nonlinear convection terms, with a second-order central scheme for diffusion. We integrate with an RK4 method using ∆ t = 0 .002 and collect snapshots at every time step. Figure 4 depicts the FOM solution at t = 0 .625 (left), t = 1 .25 (center), and t = 2 .50 (right) for a random parameter realization. In the absence of forcing, the nonlinear CDR system satisfies the energy stability property 

ddt 

12

Z

> Ω

u(x, y )2dV ≤ 0.

We construct an NN-OpInf model that enforces this property and admits a forcing vector by writing the right-hand side as a sum of a negative symmetric positive semi-definite operator, a skew-symmetric operator, and a constant forcing operator, ˆf (ˆ x, μ) = − ˆL(ˆ x, μ; w1) ˆL⊺(ˆ x, μ; w1)ˆ x +

h ˆS(ˆ x, μ; w2) − ˆS(ˆ x, μ; w2)

i

ˆx + ˆb. (6.2) We refer to this as the NN-OpInf positive semi-definite forcing (NN-OpInf-PSD-f) ROM. We also consider a linear OpInf model with forcing (P-OpInf-cA), a quadratic OpInf model with forcing (P-OpInf-cAH), the baseline NN-OpInf-NN model, and the intrusive POD-Galerkin ROM. We note the ROM does not employ hyper-reduction. Two setups are considered: 

• Reproductive: We collect snapshots and make predictions over t ∈ [0 , 2.5] for a single parameter realization σ = 2 .551, ν = 7 .111 × 10 −4, θ = 0 .8282, and η = 2 .0217. 19 5 10 15 20 

Reduced basis dimension, K

10 −5

10 −4

10 −3

10 −2

10 −1

10 0

10 1

10 2

> Relative error

Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS (a) Relative error vs. basis dimension (reproductive) 5 10 15 20 25 

Reduced basis dimension, K

10 −5

10 −4

10 −3

10 −2

10 −1

10 0

10 1

10 2

> Relative error

Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS (b) Relative error vs. basis dimension (future-state) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

x

2.46 

2.48 

2.50 

2.52 

2.54 

> u(x)

FOM Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS 

(c) Solution at t = 4 .0 (reproductive) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6

x

2.46 

2.48 

2.50 

2.52 

2.54 

> u(x)

FOM Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS (d) Solution at t = 4 .0 (future-state) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0

x

10 −8

10 −6

10 −4

10 −2

10 0

10 2

10 4

10 6

> Energy violation,  | ∫ u2dx  − ∫ u20dx |

Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS FOM 

(e) Energy violation (reproductive) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0

x

10 −7

10 −5

10 −3

10 −1

10 1

10 3

10 5

10 7

> Energy violation,  | ∫ u2dx  − ∫ u20dx |

Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SS FOM (f) Energy violation (future-state) 

Figure 3: Burgers’ equation. Relative errors for various OpInf formulations. 

20 0.00.20.40.60.81.0 

> x0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> y
> 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
> u(x, y )

(a) t = 0 .625 0.00.20.40.60.81.0  

> x0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> y
> 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
> u(x, y )

(b) t = 1 .25 0.00.20.40.60.81.0  

> x0.00.20.40.60.81.0
> y
> 0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0
> u(x, y )

(c) t = 2 .50 

Figure 4: Nonlinear CDR example. FOM solution for σ = 2 .551, ν = 7 .111 × 10 −4, θ = 0 .8282, and η = 2 .0217. 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Reduced basis dimension, K

> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(a) Error as a function of reduced-basis dimension 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

√x21 + x22 : x1 = x2 

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> u(x1, x 2)
> FOM Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(b) Solution profiles at t = 1 .0

Figure 5: Nonlinear CDR example in a reproductive configuration. Relative errors for various OpInf formulations (left) and solutions for the finest ROMs at t = 1 .0 (right). 

• Parametric prediction: We simulate the FOM for 36 parameter samples drawn from the parameter domain. The first 16 parameter instances are obtained from sampling the corners of the hypercube of the parameter domain, while the remaining 20 are obtained using uniform sampling. We collect snapshots over t ∈ [0 , 2.5]. We test on 20 novel parameter instances obtained using random sampling. Figure 5 shows results for the reproductive configuration. In Figure 5a, we observe that P-OpInf-cA and P-OpInf-cAH both fail to accurately characterize the solution and yield relative errors greater than 5% for all basis dimensions, a consequence of their restricted polynomial model form. NN-OpInf-PSD-f is comparable to the Galerkin ROM and 5–10 × more accurate than the P-OpInf models. Conversely, the standard NN-OpInf-NN model is unstable for most configurations. In the physical-space solutions at t = 1 .0 (Figure 5b), P-OpInf-cAH captures the moving shock better than P-OpInf-cA but mispredicts its location, whereas NN-OpInf-PSD-f and the Galerkin ROM are in good agreement with the FOM. Figure 6 shows results for the parametric configuration. Figures 6a–6b report reproductive results on the training parameter set, while Figures 6c–6d report predictive results on the testing set. When evaluated on the training set (Figure 6a), NN-OpInf-PSD-f is the best-performing model, followed closely by P-OpInf-cA and the Galerkin ROM. NN-OpInf-NN is unstable, and P-OpInf-cAH is stable but inaccurate. On the testing set, both P-OpInf-cA and P-OpInf-21 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Reduced basis dimension, K

> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(a) Error on the training set as a function of reduced-basis dimension 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

√x21 + x22 : x1 = x2

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> u(x1, x 2)
> FOM Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(b) Solution profiles at t = 2 .5 for a parameter instance randomly selected from the training set 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 

Reduced basis dimension, K

> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(c) Error on the testing set as a function of reduced-basis dimension 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

√x21 + x22 : x1 = x2

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> u(x1, x 2)
> FOM Galerkin ROM P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(d) Solution profiles at t = 2 .5 for a parameter instance randomly selected from the testing set 

Figure 6: Nonlinear CDR example in a parametric configuration. Relative errors for various OpInf formulations (left) and solutions for the finest ROMs at t = 2 .5 (right). Solutions across the training set are shown on the top, while the testing set is shown on the bottom. In the testing regime, the P-OpInf-cAH ROM went unstable for K > 20. 

cAH are inaccurate, reflecting the limitations of the interpolatory parametric approach in the presence of non-polynomial nonlinearities. NN-OpInf-NN remains unstable, while NN-OpInf-PSD-f performs well and is slightly more accurate than the Galerkin ROM across all basis dimensions. 

6.3. 2D nonlinear heat conduction 

We next consider a two-dimensional (2D) nonlinear heat-conduction problem on the unit square [0 , 1] 2 with temperature-dependent diffusivity κ(T ) and a constant source term. This example again illustrates the ability of NN-OpInf to learn composable structure-preserving operators. The governing equations are 

∂tT (x, y, t ) − ∇ ·  κ(T )∇T (x, y, t ) = 1 , (x, y ) ∈ [0 , 1] 2,

with Dirichlet boundary conditions T (x, y, t ) = 0 on ∂[0 , 1] 2 and initial condition T (x, y, 0) = 0. The diffusivity is parameterized as a smooth transition between k0 and k1,

κ(T ) = 12 (k0 + k1) + 12 (k1 − k0) tanh 

 T − Tc

w



,

22 with k0 = 10 −2, w = 2 × 10 −2, k1 ∈ U [0 .2, 0.5], and Tc ∈ U [0 .3, 0.5]. The spatial discretization involves a uniform grid with ( nx + 1) × (ny + 1) nodes and spacings hx = 1 /n x, hy = 1 /n y. A standard five-point finite-difference stencil is used with averaging of κ(T ) on cell faces to form a symmetric diffusion operator. Dirichlet boundary conditions are enforced weakly. For time integration, we use a Crank–Nicolson scheme. The spatial discretization results in a system that can be expressed as ˙x = −A(x)x + f ,

where A(x) is SPD. Thus, we consider the OpInf model form ˆf (ˆ x, μ) = − ˆL(ˆ x, μ; w1) ˆL⊺(ˆ x, μ; w1)ˆ x + ˆb. (6.3) We refer to this formulation as the NN-OpInf symmetric positive semi-definite with forcing (NN-OpInf-SPSD-f) ROM. We additionally consider P-OpInf-cA, P-OpInf-cAH, and NN-OpInf-NN. The Galerkin ROM is unavailable for this example. Three setups are considered: 1. Reproductive: We collect snapshots and make predictions over t ∈ [0 , 2.0] at a single parameter realization k1 = 0 .2, Tc = 0 .3. 2. Future-state prediction: We use the same parametric configuration but train only on 

t ∈ [0 , 1.0], predicting over t ∈ [0 , 2.0]. 3. Parametric prediction: We simulate the FOM for four parameter samples drawn from the parameter domain and collect snapshots over t ∈ [0 , 2.0]. We train on the parameter grid k1 = [0 .2, 0.4], Tc = [0 .3, 0.4] and test on four randomly drawn instances from the distribution. Figure 7 reports relative errors for the three configurations. We observe that NN-OpInf-SPSD-f outperforms both vanilla NN-OpInf-NN and the P-OpInf approaches in all cases. For both the reproductive and future-state configurations, NN-OpInf-SPSD-f is 5-10 × more accurate than P-OpInf-cA. Both P-OpInf-cAH and NN-OpInf-NN result in unphysical solutions and do not improve as the basis dimension is refined. NN-OpInf-SPSD-f displays a general convergence trend with increasing basis dimension, but convergence is non-monotonic. In the parametric-predictive settings, NN-OpInf-SPSD-f again outperforms P-OpInf and NN-OpInf-NN, but again does not display monotonic convergence. While monotonic convergence can be obtained by tweaking training settings (e.g., changing the learning rate, regularization) or increasing the ensemble size, this highlights challenges associated with neural network training and inference in the presence of generic nonlinearities. Nonetheless, NN-OpInf-SPSD-f clearly outperforms existing OpInf ROM methods. 

6.4. Premixed H2-air flame 

The next example is a simplified model for a premixed H2-air flame, which highlights the ability to learn an OpInf model with a parameterized nonlinear forcing term. This example has been studied in various references [33, 20, 5], and non-intrusive neural-network-based ROMs were examined in Ref. [20]. The system is described by the PDEs on Ω × [0 , T ] × D ,

∂∂t u(y, t, μ) + β · ∇ u(y, t, μ) = κ∆u(y, t, μ) + R(u, μ), y ∈ Ω,

u(y, t, μ) = ud(y), y ∈ Γd,

∇u(y, t, μ) · n = 0 , y ∈ Γn,

u(y, 0, μ) = u0(y), y ∈ Ω.

(6.4) 23 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16  

> Reduced basis dimension, K
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(a) Reproductive: relative error vs. ba-sis dimension 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16  

> Reduced basis dimension, K
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(b) Future-state: relative error vs. ba-sis dimension 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16  

> Reduced basis dimension, K
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> P-OpInf-cA P-OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-f

(c) Parametric: relative error vs. basis dimension on the testing set 

Figure 7: 2D nonlinear heat conduction. Relative errors for various OpInf formulations. We note that the P-OpInf-AH ROM at K = 4 was unstable in the future-state configuration. 

The spatial domain is Ω := [0 , L x] × [0 , L y] with Lx = 1 .8 cm and Ly = 0 .90 cm, and the temporal domain is t ∈ [0 , 0.06s]. The state u := [Y H2 , YO, YH2O, Θ] is the mass fraction of the species H 2, O2, and H 2O, and temperature, respectively, β = [50 , 0] T ∈ R2 is the advection speed with units cm ·s−1, κ = 2cm 2 ·s−1 is the diffusion parameter, and R is a nonlinear reaction source term of the form 

Ri = −νi

 Wi

ρ

  ρYH2

WH2

νH2  ρYO2

WO2

νO2

A exp 

 ERΘ



,

RT = QR H2O.

(6.5) Here, i ∈ { H2, O2, H2O} indexes the species, νH2 , ν O2 , ν H2O = 2 , 1, −2 are the stoichiometric coefficients, WH2 , W O2 , W H2O = 2 .016 , 31 .9, 18 are the molecular weights with units g · mol −1,

ρ = 1 .39 × 10 −3 g · cm −3 is the density, R = 8 .314 J · mol −1 · K−1 is the universal gas constant, and Q = 9800 K is the heat of reaction. As depicted in Figure 8, the domain boundary ∂Ω is decomposed into six segments, ∂Ω = ∪6

i=1 Γi with a Dirichlet part Γ d = ∪3

i=1 Γi and a Neumann part Γ n = ∪6

i=3 Γi. The initial condition is u(y, 0, μ) = [0 , 0, 0, 300] ⊺. The boundary conditions on Γ d are 

ud(y, t, μ) = 

(

[0 , 0, 0, 300] ⊺ y ∈ Γ1 ∪ Γ3,

[0 .0282 , 0.2259 , 0, 950] T y ∈ Γ2.

As in Ref. [20], we consider two parameters: the activation energy μ1 = E and the pre-exponential factor μ2 = A. The parameter space is D = 2.3375 × 10 12 , 6.2 × 10 12 ×[5625 .5, 9000] .

Note that the governing equations are nonlinear in the state and non-affine in the parameters, due to the presence of exp( E/R Θ) in the equation for Ri. The FOM is discretized with a second-order finite difference method on a 50 × 25 grid. We employ central differencing for dif-fusion and second-order upwind differencing for advection. Time integration uses second-order Crank–Nicolson with time step 1 × 10 −4, yielding 600 snapshots per FOM sample. Figure 9 presents FOM temperature snapshots at a randomly selected testing parameter instance. We examine the same NN-OpInf-PSD-f ROM as considered in Eq. (6.2), with the exception that the nonlinear forcing term is taken to be a fully connected feed forward neural network whose inputs are the parameters. We additionally examine P-OpInf-cA, P-OpInf-cAH, and NN-OpInf-NN models for comparison. We use a training/testing protocol similar to Ref. [20]. The training set Dtrain is a uniform 4×4 grid in D, while the testing set is Dtest = 2.98125 × 10 12 , 4.26875 × 10 12 , 5.55625 × 10 12 ×6.187917 × 10 3, 7.31275 × 10 3, 8.437583 × 10 3 . The only difference from Ref. [20] is that our testing set excludes the training samples; Ref. [20] used a 7 × 7 grid with Dtrain ⊂ D test .24 Γ1

Γ2

Γ3 Γ4

Γ5

Γ63 mm 

3 mm 

3 mm 

> x2

9 mm 

18 mm 

x1

Figure 8: Premixed H 2 air-flame example. Schematic of geometry and boundary conditions. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

x

> 0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
> y
> 0217 434 652 869 1086 1303 1521 1738 1955

(a) t = 0 .02 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

x 

> 0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
> y
> 0217 434 652 869 1086 1303 1521 1738 1955

(b) t = 0 .04 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

x 

> 0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
> y
> 0217 434 652 869 1086 1303 1521 1738 1955

(c) t = 0 .06 

Figure 9: Premixed H 2 air-flame example. FOM solutions for temperature at t = 0 .02 (left), t = 0 .04 (center), and t = 0 .06 (right) for ( μ1, μ 2) = (5 .55625 × 10 12 , 8.437583 × 10 3). 

25 10 20 30 40 50 60 

Reduced basis dimension, K      

> 10 −5
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> OpInf-cA OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-PSD-f (a) Training parameter set, Dtrain 10 20 30 40 50 60

Reduced basis dimension, K  

> 10 −5
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Relative error
> OpInf-cA OpInf-cAH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-PSD-f (b) Testing parameter set, Dtest

Figure 10: Premixed H 2 air-flame example. Relative errors for various OpInf formulations as a function of ROM dimension. 

Figure 10 reports errors for the training set (left) and testing set (right) on the premixed 

H2-air flame example. NN-OpInf-PSD-f outperforms NN-OpInf-NN by 5–10 ×, and yields errors approximately an order of magnitude lower than those reported in Ref. [20]. Unlike the previous examples, the linear and quadratic P-OpInf models here are more accurate on the training set than NN-OpInf-PSD-f. While we note that a more accurate NN-OpInf-PSD-f ROM could be trained by tweaking the training settings, this result suggests that the polynomial terms dominate the dynamics and the use of an NN-OpInf model may be unnecessary. However, NN-OpInf-PSD-f yields slightly lower errors on the testing set than P-OpInf, demonstrating some benefit from the non-polynomial parameterization. At the highest basis dimension, NN-OpInf-PSD-f achieves roughly a 3 × lower error than the linear and quadratic P-OpInf models. We omit physical solution plots for these OpInf models as they are visually indistinguishable from the FOM. 

6.5. 3D hyper-elastic torsion problem 

The last application we consider arises in finite deformation solid mechanics, where the gov-erning equations do not admit a polynomial structure for most material models. This example highlights the ability of NN-OpInf to infer a nonlinear OpInf model preserving the Lagrangian structure of the FOM. To this end, consider a body on the reference domain Ω ⊂ R3 undergoing finite deformations described by x = ψ (X), where ψ : Ω → W is the deformation map, X ∈ Ωare the reference coordinates, x ∈ W are the deformed coordinates, and W is the deformed domain. The dynamics are described by the Euler–Lagrange equations 

ρ0 ¨ψ = ∇ · P, (6.6) subject to the initial conditions, 

ψ(t0, x ) = ψ0 in Ω , ˙ψ(t0, x ) = v0 in Ω . (6.7) In the above, ρ0 is the mass density and P is the first Piola-Kirchhoff stress. We consider free boundary conditions in the example that follows. A Galerkin finite element discretization of Eq. (6.6) yields the corresponding discrete system 

M ¨x = f (x),

26 where M is the mass matrix and f are the internal forces. We consider a Neohookean material model with elastic modulus 1 × 10 9 Pa, Poisson’s ratio 0 .25, and density ρ = 1000 kg/m 3.We emphasize that this material model gives rise to dynamics that are highly nonlinear, with nonlinearities that are far more complex than polynomial nonlinearities; see Appendix A.3 of [52] for details. Moreover, the simulated dynamics are fundamentally nonlinear. The problem setup models the distortion of a free beam subject to an initial velocity, which results in a high-degree of torsion; a similar example was considered in Ref. [40, 52]. The beam is of size 0.05 × 1.0 × 0.05 subject to an initial velocity profile vx = αyz , vy = βxz , where α and β control its magnitude. The system is discretized using (first-order) piecewise-linear polynomial elements of size ∆ x = ∆ y = ∆ z = 0 .01 m, while time integration uses the (second-order) Newmark-β

scheme with ∆ t = 1 × 10 −5 s, β = 0 .25, and γ = 0 .5. The discretized governing equations extremize the mechanical Lagrangian, 

L(x, ˙x) = T ( ˙ x) − V (x) := 12 ˙xT M ˙x − V (x),

where T ( ˙ x) = 12 ˙xT M ˙x is the kinetic energy and V (x) is the potential energy satisfying V ′(x) = 

f (x). To construct an NN-OpInf ROM that maintains the Lagrangian structure of the FOM, we parameterize the right hand side with the SPSD potential operator, ˆf (ˆ x, μ) = ∂∂ ˆx

h

ˆx⊺ ˆL(ˆ x, μ; w) ˆL⊺(ˆ x, μ; w)ˆ x

i

. (6.8) We refer to this formulation as the NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential ROM, and note that the resulting ROM satisfies the Euler-Lagrange equations ¨ˆx − ˆV ′(ˆ x) = 0,

associated with the reduced Lagrangian ˆL(ˆ x, ˙ˆx) = ˙ˆx⊺ ˙ˆx − ˆV (ˆ x) := ˙ˆx⊺ ˙ˆx − ˆx⊺ ˆL(ˆ x, μ; w) ˆL⊺(ˆ x, μ; w)ˆ x.

This model is compared to the P-OpInf-A, P-OpInf-AH, and NN-OpInf-NN ROMs. Note that the mass matrix M is readily available in this example, so we construct an M -orthonormal ROM basis as is standard practice. Due to the strong non-linearities in this problem, in the NN-OpInf ROMs we set the number of neurons per layer to be twice the size of the ROM dimension, nn = 2 K.Two configurations are considered: 1. Reproductive ROM: We set α = β = 7500, collecting snapshots and making predictions over t ∈ [0 , 2.5 × 10 −3]. Snapshots are collected at every FOM time step for a total of 250 snapshots. 2. Future-state prediction: Using the same configuration as above, we predict over the longer interval t ∈ [0 , 5 × 10 −3]. Figure 11 shows results for relative error vs basis dimension for the reproductive configura-tion (left) and future-state configuration (right). We observe that the NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential model, which preserves the Lagrangian structure of the FOM, is approximately an order of magnitude more accurate that standard P-OpInf models. The vanilla NN-OpInf-NN model is unstable. Figure 12 shows the physical space solutions for displacement for the reproductive configuration, while Figure 13 shows results for the future-state prediction configuration. We observe that the NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential operator faithfully approximates the FOM trajec-tory for the reproductive configuration and, while it differs slightly in phase as compared to the FOM in the future-state configuration, still provides a reasonable solution. While the OpInf-AH 27 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 

Basis dimension       

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> Relative error
> P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential (a) Reproductive configuration. 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

Basis dimension  

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> Relative error
> P-OpInf-A P-OpInf-AH NN-OpInf-NN NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential (b) Future-state prediction.
> Figure 11: Torsion problem. Relative error versus basis dimension.

model provides a reasonable solution at the end of the reproductive regime t = 2 .5×10 −3, it still associates with a high error and yields unphysical predictions in the future-state configuration. The linear P-OpInf-A model performs poorly for all configurations. However, note that there exist in the literature Lagrangian and Hamiltonian structure-preserving P-OpInf formulations which may perform better than these baselines, e.g., Refs. [49, 53, 28, 29]. 

7. Conclusions 

We presented NN-OpInf: a neural-network-based, structure-preserving, composable OpInf framework for non-intrusive reduced-order modeling. The approach learns a latent dynamics model from snapshot data by parameterizing a reduced velocity field with a sum of neural-network-based operators, each admitting a specified algebraic structure (e.g., skew-symmetry). The approach captures complex dynamics while preserving key local structure, providing a flex-ible mechanism for blending heterogeneous operator blocks while maintaining interpretability and physical constraints at the component level. We outlined the mathematical formulation of the approach as well as the open-source NN-OpInf software package in which the approach is implemented. We analyzed computational cost and convexity properties of NN-OpInf, including explicit FLOP comparisons against linear and quadratic P-OpInf and convexity results for linear struc-tured operators. This analysis shows that the computational cost of the forward pass of NN-OpInf models is on the same order of magnitude as that for quadratic P-OpInf models, and that the primary increase in cost from NN-OpInf occurs in the (offline) training phase. This is due to NN-OpInf inference problems being non-convex in general, requiring iterative batch gradient-descent optimization algorithms where many forward and adjoint passes are executed. However, note that this relative increase in training cost over P-OpInf reduces for large basis dimensions, while the online costs remain comparable to global quadratic models of the same dimension. Moreover, NN-OpInf ROMs are more general, as they are capable of capturing generic nonlinearities. Numerical experiments across several nonlinear and parametric systems demonstrate that the structured NN-OpInf models consistently improve accuracy and robustness relative to P-OpInf and vanilla neural network baselines, particularly in predictive regimes. The results also show that enforcing structure can stabilize ROM performance and improve generalization when polynomial structure is not adequate. Future work will focus on improved optimization 28 (a) FOM (b) NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential   

> (c) P-OpInf-A (d) P-OpInf-AH (e) NN-OpInf-NN

Figure 12: Torsion problem. Displacement solutions at t = 2 .5×10 −3 s ( K = 40). The coloring is the displacement magnitude. 

29 (a) FOM (b) NN-OpInf-SPSD-Potential 

(c) P-OpInf-A (d) P-OpInf-AH (e) NN-OpInf-NN 

Figure 13: Torsion problem. Displacement solutions at t = 3 .75 × 10 −3 s ( K = 40). The coloring is the displacement magnitude. 

30 strategies, richer operator libraries, dynamics-constrained training, uncertainty quantification for ROM predictions, and extensions to additional multiphysics systems. 

8. Acknowledgements 

Support for this work was received through Sandia National Laboratories’ Laboratory Di-rected Research and Development (LDRD) program and through the U.S. Department of En-ergy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Mathematical Multi-faceted Integrated Capability Centers (MMICCs) program, under Field Work Proposal 22025291 and the Multifaceted Mathematics for Predictive Digital Twins (M2dt) project. Additionally, the writing of this manuscript was funded in part by Irina Tezaur’s Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE). Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology & Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC (NTESS), a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc., for the U.S. De-partment of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration (DOE/NNSA) under contract DE-NA0003525. This written work is authored by an employee of NTESS. The employee, not NTESS, owns the right, title and interest in and to the written work and is responsible for its contents. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the written work do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Government. The publisher acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this written work or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. The DOE will provide public access to results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan. 

9. Declaration on the Use of Generative AI 

In preparing this manuscript, the authors used generative AI for manuscript formatting, as-sistance with table generation, general manuscript editing and review, and code documentation. 

References                   

> [1] NN-OpInf. https://sandialabs.github.io/nnopinf/, 2026. [2] M. Barrault, Y. Maday, N. C. Nguyen, and A. T. Patera , An ‘empirical interpolation’ method: application to efficient reduced-basis discretization of partial differential equations, Comptes Rendus Math-ematique, 339 (2004), pp. 667–672. [3] G. Berkooz, P. Holmes, and J. L. Lumley , The Proper Orthogonal Decomposition in the Analysis of Turbulent Flows, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 25 (1993), pp. 539–575. [4] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe , Convex Optimization, Cambridge University Press, 2004. [5] M. Buffoni and K. Willcox , Projection-based model reduction for reacting flows. [6] K. Carlberg, M. Barone, and H. Antil ,Galerkin v. least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection in nonlinear model reduction, Journal of Computational Physics, 330 (2017), pp. 693–734. [7] K. Carlberg, C. Bou-Mosleh, and C. Farhat , Efficient non-linear model reduction via a least-squares Petrov–Galerkin projection and compressive tensor approximations, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 86 (2011), pp. 155–181. [8] K. Carlberg, C. Farhat, J. Cortial, and D. Amsallem , The GNAT method for nonlinear model reduction: Effective implementation and application to computational fluid dynamics and turbulent flows, Journal of Computational Physics, 242 (2013), pp. 623 – 647. [9] S. Chaturantabut and D. C. Sorensen , Nonlinear Model Reduction via Discrete Empirical Interpolation, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 32 (2010), pp. 2737–2764. [10] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud , Neural Ordinary Differential Equations, 2019. [11] M. Cranmer, S. Greydanus, S. Hoyer, P. Battaglia, D. Spergel, and S. Ho , Lagrangian Neural Networks, in ICLR 2020 Workshop on Integration of Deep Neural Models and Differential Equations.

31 [12] Diaz, Alejandro N. and Needels, Jacob T. and Tezaur, Irina K. and Blonigan, Patrick J. ,Kernel Manifolds: Nonlinear-Augmentation Dimensionality Reduction Using Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Spaces, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 126 (2025), p. e70230. [13] T. Duong, A. Altawaitan, J. Stanley, and N. Atanasov , Port-Hamiltonian neural ODE networks on Lie groups for robot dynamics learning and control, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, (2024). [14] C. Eldred, F. Gay-Balmaz, S. Huraka, and V. Putkaradze , Lie–Poisson neural networks (LPNets): data-based computing of hamiltonian systems with symmetries, Neural Networks, 173 (2024), p. 106162. [15] I.-G. Farcas et al. , Domain Decomposition for Data-Driven Reduced Modeling of Large-Scale Systems, AIAA Journal, 62 (2024), pp. 1–16. [16] C. Farhat, P. Avery, T. Chapman, and J. Cortial , Dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite element dynamic models with finite rotations and energy-based mesh sampling and weighting for computational efficiency, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 98 (2014), pp. 625–662. [17] M. Finzi, K. A. Wang, and A. G. Wilson , Simplifying hamiltonian and lagrangian neural networks via explicit constraints, Advances in neural information processing systems, 33 (2020), pp. 13880–13889. [18] S. Fresca, L. Dede’, and A. Manzoni , A Comprehensive Deep Learning-Based Approach to Reduced Order Modeling of Nonlinear Time-Dependent Parametrized PDEs, Journal of Scientific Computing, 87 (2021), p. 61. [19] W. D. Fries, X. He, and Y. Choi , LaSDI: Parametric Latent Space Dynamics Identification, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 399 (2022), p. 115436. [20] H. Gao, J.-X. Wang, and M. J. Zahr , Non-intrusive model reduction of large-scale, nonlinear dynamical systems using deep learning, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 412 (2020), p. 132614. [21] Y. Geng, J. Singh, L. Ju, B. Kramer, and Z. Wang , Gradient preserving Operator Inference: Data-driven reduced-order models for equations with gradient structure, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 427 (2024), p. 117033. [22] L. Gkimisis, N. Aretz, M. Tezzele, T. Richter, P. Benner, and K. E. Willcox , Non-intrusive reduced-order modeling for dynamical systems with spatially localized features, Computer Methods in Ap-plied Mechanics and Engineering, 444 (2025), p. 118115. [23] L. Gkimisis, I. P. Duff, P. Goyal, and P. Benner , On the representation of energy-preserving quadratic operators with application to Operator Inference, Applied Mathematics Letters, 173 (2026), p. 109761. [24] S. Greydanus, M. Dzamba, and J. Yosinski , Hamiltonian neural networks, Advances in neural informa-tion processing systems, 32 (2019). [25] A. Gruber, M. Gunzburger, L. Ju, and Z. Wang , A comparison of neural network architectures for data-driven reduced-order modeling, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 393 (2022), p. 114764. [26] A. Gruber, K. Lee, H. Lim, N. Park, and N. Trask , Efficiently Parameterized Neural Metriplectic Systems, in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. [27] A. Gruber, K. Lee, and N. Trask , Reversible and irreversible bracket-based dynamics for deep graph neural networks, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36 (2023), pp. 38454–38484. [28] A. Gruber and I. Tezaur , Canonical and noncanonical Hamiltonian operator inference, Computer Meth-ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 416 (2023), p. 116334. [29] A. Gruber and I. Tezaur , Variationally Consistent Hamiltonian Model Reduction, SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 24 (2025), pp. 376–414. [30] J. Hesthaven and S. Ubbiali , Non-intrusive reduced order modeling of nonlinear problems using neural networks, Journal of Computational Physics, 363 (2018), pp. 55–78. [31] T. Koike and E. Qian , Energy-Preserving Reduced Operator Inference for Efficient Design and Control, in AIAA SCITECH 2024 Forum, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Jan. 2024. [32] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell , Simple and Scalable Predictive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles, 2017. [33] K. Lee and K. T. Carlberg , Model reduction of dynamical systems on nonlinear manifolds using deep convolutional autoencoders, Journal of Computational Physics, 404 (2020), p. 108973. [34] K. Lee and E. J. Parish , Parameterized neural ordinary differential equations: applications to computational physics problems, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-neering Sciences, 477 (2021), p. 20210162. [35] Lee, Kookjin and Trask, Nathaniel and Stinis, Panos , Machine learning structure preserving brackets for forecasting irreversible processes, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, eds., vol. 34, Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 5696–5707. [36] J. Liu, H. Liu, X. Deng, and D. Xu , SSR1M: A stochastic SR1 method with momentum acceleration for non-Convex optimization, Neural Networks, 195 (2026), p. 108283. [37] S. McQuarrie , Operator Inference in Python. [38] S. A. McQuarrie, P. Khodabakhshi, and K. E. Willcox , Nonintrusive Reduced-Order Models for Parametric Partial Differential Equations via Data-Driven Operator Inference, SIAM Journal on Scientific 

32 Computing, 45 (2023), pp. A1917–A1946. [39] I. Moore, C. Wentland, A. Gruber, and I. Tezaur , Domain Decomposition-based coupling of Operator Inference reduced order models via the Schwarz alternating method, 2024. [40] A. Mota, I. Tezaur, and G. Phlipot , The Schwarz alternating method for dynamic solid mechanics, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, (2022), pp. 1–36. [41] J. S. R. Park, S. W. Cheung, Y. Choi, and Y. Shin , tLaSDI: Thermodynamics-informed latent space dynamics identification, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 429 (2024), p. 117144. [42] B. Peherstorfer , Sampling Low-Dimensional Markovian Dynamics for Preasymptotically Recovering Reduced Models from Data with Operator Inference, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 42 (2020), pp. A3489–A3515. [43] B. Peherstorfer and K. Willcox , Data-driven operator inference for nonintrusive projection-based model reduction, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 306 (2016), pp. 196–215. [44] E. Qian, I.-G. Farcas ¸, and K. Willcox , Reduced Operator Inference for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 44 (2022), pp. A1934–A1959. [45] E. Qian, B. Kramer, B. Peherstorfer, and K. Willcox , Lift & Learn: Physics-informed machine learning for large-scale nonlinear dynamical systems, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 406 (2020), p. 132401. [46] C. Rodriguez, I. Tezaur, A. Mota, A. Gruber, E. Parish, and C. Wentland , Transmission Conditions for the Non-Overlapping Schwarz Coupling of Full Order and Operator Inference Models, 2025. [47] H. Rosenberger, B. Sanderse, and G. Stabile , Exact operator inference with minimal data, 2025. [48] O. San, R. Maulik, and M. Ahmed , An artificial neural network framework for reduced order modeling of transient flows, Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, 77 (2019), pp. 271–287. [49] H. Sharma and B. Kramer , Preserving Lagrangian structure in data-driven reduced-order modeling of large-scale dynamical systems, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 462 (2024), p. 134128. [50] H. Sharma, D. A. Najera-Flores, M. D. Todd, and B. Kramer , Lagrangian operator inference enhanced with structure-preserving machine learning for nonintrusive model reduction of mechanical systems, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 423 (2024), p. 116865. [51] H. Sharma, Z. Wang, and B. Kramer , Hamiltonian operator inference: Physics-preserving learning of reduced-order models for canonical Hamiltonian systems, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 431 (2022), p. 133122. [52] I. Tezaur, E. Parish, A. Gruber, I. Moore, C. Wentland, and A. Mota , Hybrid coupling with operator inference and the overlapping Schwarz alternating method, 2026. [53] A. Vijaywargiya, S. A. McQuarrie, and A. Gruber , Tensor parametric Hamiltonian operator inference, 2025. [54] Q. Wang, J. S. Hesthaven, and D. Ray , Non-intrusive reduced order modeling of unsteady flows using artificial neural networks with application to a combustion problem, Journal of Computational Physics, 384 (2019), pp. 289–307. [55] M. Yano and A. T. Patera , An LP empirical quadrature procedure for reduced basis treatment of parametrized nonlinear PDEs, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 344 (2019), pp. 1104–1123. [56] S. Yıldız, P. Goyal, P. Benner, and B. Karas¨ ozen , Learning reduced-order dynamics for parametrized shallow water equations from data, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 93 (2021), pp. 2803–2821. [57] Z. Zhang, Y. Shin, and G. Em Karniadakis , GFINNs: GENERIC formalism informed neural networks for deterministic and stochastic dynamical systems, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 380 (2022), p. 20210207. 

33