Title: Neural Operator Quantum State: A Foundation Model for Quantum Dynamics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25066v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:34:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Neural Operator Quantum State: A Foundation Model for Quantum Dynamics 

Zihao Qi, 1, ∗ Christopher Earls, 2 and Yang Peng 3, 4, †

> 1

Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 

> 2

Center for Applied Mathematics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 

> 3

Department of Physics and Astronomy, California State University, Northridge, Northridge, California 91330, USA 

> 4

Institute of Quantum Information and Matter and Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 

(Dated: March 27, 2026) Capturing the dynamics of quantum many-body systems under time-dependent driving protocols is a central challenge for numerical simulations. Existing methods such as tensor networks and time-dependent neural quantum states, however, must be re-run for every protocol. In this work, we introduce the Neural Operator Quantum State (NOQS) as a foundation model for quantum dynamics. Rather than solving the Schr¨ odinger equation for individual trajectories, our approach aims to learn the solution operator that maps entire driving protocols to time-evolved quantum states. Once trained, the NOQS predicts time evolution under unseen protocols in a single for-ward pass, requiring no additional optimization. We validate NOQS on the two-dimensional Ising model with time-dependent longitudinal and transverse fields, demonstrating accurate prediction not only for unseen in-distribution protocols, but also for qualitatively different, out-of-distribution functional forms of driving. Further, a single NOQS model can be transferred between different temporal resolutions, and can be efficiently fine-tuned with sparse experimental measurements to improve predictions across all observables at negligible cost. Our work introduces a new paradigm for quantum dynamics simulation and provides a practical computational-experimental interface for driven quantum systems. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Characterizing the ground-state properties and dy-namical evolution of quantum many-body systems re-mains a central challenge in physics, as exact representa-tions of the many-body wavefunction become computa-tionally intractable for large systems due to the exponen-tial growth of Hilbert space dimension with the system size. To overcome this difficulty, a variety of approximate methods have been developed. Matrix product states (MPS) and the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) [1–5] have achieved remarkable success in one-dimensional systems, but their applicability to higher di-mensions is limited. Higher-dimensional tensor-network approaches, such as projected entangled pair states (PEPS) [6–9], can in principle address this limitation, but only at substantially increased computational cost. More generally, in tensor-network methods, the amount of entanglement that can be represented is controlled by the bond dimension, which is itself limited in practice by available computational resources. Consequently, these methods often struggle to capture highly entangled states and are therefore less well suited to quantum dynamics. Traditional variational Monte Carlo (VMC) methods, in-cluding time-dependent formulations, also face difficul-ties in some systems due to the sign problem [10]. In ad-dition, their reliance on Metropolis-based Markov-chain sampling leads to correlated samples and can result in   

> ∗Contact author: zq73@cornell.edu
> †Contact author: yang.peng@csun.edu

non-ergodic behavior when acceptance rates are low. Deep neural networks, which are capable of ap-proximating arbitrary functions [11–13], have recently emerged as powerful ansatz for representing quan-tum wavefunctions in equilibrium and out-of-equilibrium quantum many-body systems [14–29]. These neural-network quantum states (NQS) are fundamentally ap-pealing because they are not constrained by the area-law entanglement structure characteristic of tensor-network states [30], nor do they, a priori , suffer from the sign problem when combined with VMC techniques. More-over, certain network architectures, such as recurrent neural networks [31, 32] and transformers [33], support direct, or autoregressive , sampling schemes that gener-ate uncorrelated samples [34–36]. With this efficient sampling strategy, autoregressive NQS have been shown to accurately characterize the ground states and time-evolution of various quantum lattice models [22, 34, 36– 41]. Despite the success of autoregressive NQS in model-ing ground states, nonequilibrium quantum dynamics has been explored far less extensively within this framework. Typically, a time-dependent NQS (tNQS) is constructed by allowing the parameters of the neural network to de-pend on time. These parameters are then optimized via the time-dependent variational principle [42]. It has been shown that tNQS can approximate the time evolution of a quantum state under a given time-dependent Hamilto-nian H(t) [22, 23]. However, existing approaches to mod-eling time-evolved wavefunctions share a common limi-tation: each computation or optimization is performed for a single instance of a driving protocol. When H(t)is changed, the entire procedure must be repeated from 

> arXiv:2603.25066v1 [quant-ph] 26 Mar 2026

2scratch. In practice, however, one is often interested in time evolution under a family of driving protocols: for ex-ample, when optimizing pulse sequences for state prepa-ration or benchmarking quantum simulators. A natural question, then, is whether we can move be-yond this pointwise paradigm. Recent works [17, 43, 44] on “foundational neural quantum states” have taken a step in this direction by demonstrating the ability of a unified model to represent ground states across a fam-ily of Hamiltonians. However, this transferability across static system parameters remains limited. Generalization in this setting amounts to interpolation within a param-eter space λ ∈ Rd, and the model needs only learn a function of finitely many parameters. In contrast, driving protocols in time-dependent sys-tems are qualitatively different: they are functions of time, and therefore elements of an infinite-dimensional space. Generalizing across such a space is no longer in-terpolation, but requires learning an operator that maps between function spaces. This is the setting of operator learning [45–47], and it requires a fundamentally novel ar-chitecture and conceptual framework, which, to the best of our knowledge, have yet to be developed. In this work, we bridge this gap by developing a foun-dational model that transfers across functional spaces of driving protocols. Our model takes a driving protocol 

H(t) as input and returns the corresponding time-evolved quantum state |ψ(t)⟩ as output. Rather than solving for the time evolution separately for each trajectory, the model, once trained, can predict dynamics under any protocol through a single forward pass. Our approach therefore represents a paradigm shift from solving the Schr¨ odinger equation to learning how to solve it. Concretely, we introduce the Neural Operator Quan-tum State (NOQS) , a hybrid architecture that combines a transformer-based autoregressive wavefunction ansatz with a neural operator that maps between functional spaces. These two components process, respectively, the discrete many-body Hilbert space and the continuous temporal structure of the driving protocol. The NOQS model is trained in a self-supervised manner, without re-quiring external data. We validate our approach on the two-dimensional transverse-field Ising model (TFIM) with time-dependent longitudinal and transverse fields. Trained on an ensem-ble of random driving protocols, the model generalizes accurately not only to in-distribution instances of the driving protocol, but also to qualitatively different out-of-distribution functional forms, such as Gaussian pulses and ramps. Furthermore, we show that the NOQS model can be trained on a coarse temporal grid and make accu-rately inference on a denser discretization, at times never encountered during training. The NOQS can be further efficiently fine-tuned in a protocol-specific manner, lead-ing to improved accuracy across observables at all times, while requiring only a small number of local measure-ments. Our work introduces the concept of operator learning over the space of driving protocols for quantum many-body dynamics. As evidenced by its ability to gener-alize to out-of-distribution functional forms and trans-fer between discretizations, our model learns a genuine functional mapping rather than merely memorizing in-dividual trajectories. This capability opens a two-way interface between computation and experiment. In one direction, a pre-trained NOQS can provide predictions for local observables under previously unseen driving proto-cols without requiring costly numerical simulations. In the other direction, NOQS can incorporate sparse mea-surement data from experimental platforms and refine its prediction for the full quantum state at all times. Our framework therefore provides a practical bridge between numerical computation and experiment for driven quan-tum systems. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we review the basics of NQS. In Sec. III, we introduce the NOQS model and describe the training procedure. In Sec. IV, we demonstrate the accuracy and transferabil-ity of the NOQS framework through numerical results on the two-dimensional driven TFIM. Finally, in Sec. V, we summarize our findings and discuss future research directions.  

> II. NEURAL-NETWORK QUANTUM STATES

In this section, we begin by reviewing the Neural-Network Quantum States (NQS), which form the founda-tion of our approach. We introduce the neural-network based variational ansatz, the autoregressive sampling scheme, and the variational Monte Carlo (VMC) frame-work used to evaluate expectation values during training and inference. For concreteness, we will focus on quantum systems consisting of spin-half ( S = 1 /2) degrees of freedom, whose canonical basis consists of product states of Sz ,namely |σ⟩ ≡ | σ1, σ 2, . . . ⟩, with σi ∈ {− 1, +1 } indicating the eigenvalues of 2 Sz . For any spin configuration σ, the wavefunction ψ(σ) ≡ ⟨ σ|ψ⟩ of a quantum state |ψ⟩ takes a complex number. In other words, the wavefunction can be viewed as a function that maps from the space of configurations to C:

ψ : {− 1, +1 }N → C, (1) and each amplitude can be decomposed into two real numbers, an amplitude and a phase: 

ψ(σ) = pp(σ)eiϕ (σ), (2) where both p(σ) and ϕ(σ) are outputted by the neural networks. For stability of training and learning, in prac-tice one often parameterizes the natural logarithm of the wavefunction, log( ψ(σ)) = 12 log( p(σ)) + iϕ (σ). (3) 3Early NQS architectures were based on restricted Boltzmann machines (RBMs) due to their analytical tractability [16, 48–51]. More recently, autoregressive architectures such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) and transformers have attracted considerable interest, owing to their ability to perform exact sampling [34, 36, 38–41]. A key structural property exploited by au-toregressive NQS is the factorization of the Born prob-ability distribution. For any spin configuration σ =(σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N ), the joint probability of this configura-tion can be written as a product of conditional probabil-ities: 

p(σ) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

p(σi|σ1, . . . , σ i−1) (4) where p(·|· ) denotes the conditional probability of the ith spin, given all preceding spins. The phase is factorized in an analogous way. The conditional probabilities are produced by the autoregressive network. This factorization has several important consequences. First, it enables exact, unbiased sampling: spins are gen-erated sequentially, or autoregressively , where each indi-vidual σi is drawn from its own conditional distribution, yielding independent and identically distributed samples from p(σ), without requiring Markov chain Monte Carlo. Second, it avoids direct normalization over the expo-nentially large configuration space; instead, the condi-tional probabilities are individually normalized by con-struction. These properties stabilize training, particu-larly for larger systems, and make autoregressive mod-els a suitable ansatz to variationally represent quantum states. Given samples autoregressively drawn from the Born distribution p(σ) = |ψ(σ)|2, expectation values, which are intractable to compute exactly for larger systems, can now be estimated stochastically. The expectation value of a general operator O to the quantum state |ψ⟩ can be estimated as: 

⟨O⟩ = X

> σ

p(σ) Oloc (σ), (5) where 

Oloc (σ) = ⟨σ|O|ψ⟩⟨σ|ψ⟩ (6) is the local estimator. In practice, the sum is replaced by a sample average over configurations. The variational ground state is obtained by optimizing the NQS parameters to minimize the sample average of the local energy, which is defined as 

Eloc (σ) = X

> σ′

Hσσ ′

ψ(σ′)

ψ(σ) . (7) This can be evaluated efficiently for local Hamiltonians, since only a polynomial number of configurations σ′ yield non-trivial overlap with σ i.e. have non-vanishing matrix elements Hσσ ′ .  

> III. NEURAL OPERATOR QUANTUM STATE A. Problem Formulation

The time evolution of a quantum many-body state is governed by the Schr¨ odinger equation: 

i∂ t|ψ(t)⟩ = H(t)|ψ(t)⟩, (8) where the Hamiltonian H(t) is generally time-dependent. Formally, the time-evolved state can be written as a time-ordered exponential acting on the initial state |ψ(0) ⟩:

|ψ(t)⟩ = T exp 



−i

ˆ t

> 0

dt ′ H(t′)



|ψ(0) ⟩, (9) where T denotes time ordering. Computing time-evolved states is a central challenge in quantum many-body physics, particularly for driven systems, where the Hamil-tonian varies continuously in time. One must not only represent an exponentially large quantum state, but track its evolution under an arbitrary time-dependent protocol. Previous approaches to this problem, such as exact di-agonalization, tensor networks, Trotterized circuits, or time-dependent neural quantum states, share a common limitation. Namely, these approaches compute |ψ(t)⟩

for a single trajectory H(t). If the driving protocol changes, the computation or optimization must be per-formed again. This point-wise paradigm presents a se-vere bottleneck in settings where one needs to track time evolution of quantum states across a family of time-dependent Hamiltonians: for instance, when scanning control parameters in a quantum simulator, or optimiz-ing a driving protocol for state preparation. In this work, we propose a fundamentally different ap-proach. Rather than studying time evolution under in-dividual trajectories, we learn the solution operator it-self. We introduce the Neural Operator Quantum State (NOQS), which maps from driving protocols to time-evolved quantum states, given a fixed initial state |ψ0⟩.More precisely, the NOQS is an operator F(θ,η ) that de-pends on parameters ( θ, η ): 

F(θ,η ) : H(t) 7 −→ ψθ (σ; Nη [H(t)]) , (10) where ψθ (σ; Nη [H(t)]) is the NOQS ansatz for the time-dependent wavefunction amplitude ⟨σ|ψ(t)⟩, and we re-quire that ψθ (σ; Nη [H(t)])( t = 0) ≡ ⟨ σ|ψ0⟩ at the start-ing time, for all H(t). At a high level, ψθ is an NQS introduced in Sec. II, conditioned on the parameters 

Nη [H(t)] ≡ M (t). The parameters M (t) are called con-text tokens : they are time-dependent vector functions, obtained from mapping the driving protocols H(t) via a neural operator Nη parametrized by η. The explicit def-initions of this hybrid architecture will be introduced in more detail in Sec. III B. We note that the mapping in Eq. 10 is between function spaces : the input and output are both functions of time. Learning this operator is the central goal of our work. 4The conceptual shift, then, is from solving to learn-ing to solve the Schr¨ odinger equation. Training the op-erator Fθ,η allows for predicting time evolution for not just one instance of H(t), but instead over the full space of driving protocols. The optimization of Fθ,η is per-formed once, over a family of Hamiltonians, after which the time-evolution under any new, unseen protocol is obtained in a single forward pass through the network, with no further training needed. This amortization of pre-training computational effort is what distinguishes our approach from both conventional solvers and existing time-dependent NQS methods. In spirit, our approach is analogous to how foundation models in machine learning (such as Large Language Models) are capable of perform-ing well, over a distribution of tasks. In order to train such a model, we need an architecture that can naturally handle the two degrees of freedom in the problem: the continuous temporal structure of the driving protocol H(t), and the discrete structure of the spin configurations. In the following subsection, we intro-duce the NOQS architecture, which achieves this separa-tion through a hybrid structure; coupling a Fourier Neu-ral Operator, which processes the driving protocol in the time-frequency domain, to a transformer-based quantum state ansatz that represents the many-body wavefunc-tion.  

> B. Model Architecture

The backbone of our NOQS model is a transformer-based, autoregressive representation of the quantum many-body wavefunction. The transformer architec-ture [33], with its all-to-all self-attention mechanism, has been shown to be a powerful ansatz for repre-senting a wide range of spin and fermionic quantum states [17, 36, 38, 52, 53]. We now begin with a descrip-tion concerning the architectural details of the proposed transformer model, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The inputs to the transformer are spin configurations 

σ = ( σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N ). Each physical spin σi ∈ { +1 , −1}

is first mapped to a token in a de-dimensional latent space via an embedding layer: 

ei = WE σi, WE ∈ Rde (11) where WE is a learnable weight matrix shared across all sites i. This produces an embedding matrix E ∈ RN ×de

for any configuration of N spins. Since the embedding layer is identical across all spins, we also need to inject information about the spatial lo-cations of the spins. Therefore, we augment each token with a (learnable) positional encoding pi ∈ Rde that car-ries information about the geometry of the underlying lattice. The input to the decoder layers is therefore: 

xi = ei + pi, i = 1 , . . . , N, (12) yielding an input matrix X ∈ RN ×de consisting of xi as row vectors. The representations {xi} are sequentially processed by a stack of LT decoder blocks. Each decoder block con-sists of three sub-layers with residual connections and layer normalization, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Next we dis-cuss this structure of the decoder blocks; for simplicity of notation, we suppress the index of the decoders. In each decoder block, the first sub-layer that X passes through is a masked, multi-head self-attention mecha-nism. For each of the nh attention heads, the input 

X ∈ RN ×de is projected to queries, keys, and values: 

Q(s) = X W (s) 

> Q

, K(s) = X W (s) 

> K

, V (s) = X W (s) 

> V

,

(13) where W (s) 

> Q

, W (s) 

> K

, W (s) 

> V

∈ Rde×dh and dh = de/n h is the embedding dimension per attention head. Here the su-perscript ( s) is an index for the attention heads. The self-attention output for each head is: Attn (s) = softmax Q(s)K(s)T

√dh

+ M

!

V (s), (14) where softmax is applied row-wise. For any vector A ∈

Rd, the softmax is defined as: softmax( A)i = exp( Ai)

Pdk=1 exp( Ak) , (15) where Ai denotes the ith entry of the vector. The soft-max, similar to the partition function, assigns a (nor-malized) weight to each entry of the vector. Inside the softmax argument, we impose a causal mask M ∈ RN ×N

defined as: 

Mij =

(

0 if j ≤ i, 

−∞ if j > i. (16) This mask enforces causality and the autoregressive property, and is crucial for modeling physical systems [34, 38, 39, 54]. It ensures that the representation of spin σi

attends only to spins σ1, . . . , σ i−1 that precede it, thereby preserving the conditional factorization of Eq. (4). The outputs of all heads are concatenated, SelfAttn( X) = Concat 



Attn (1) , . . . , Attn (nh)

WO + bO ,

(17) and projected by WO ∈ Rde×de along with a bias vector 

bO ∈ Rde , followed by a residual connection and layer normalization. Following the self-attention block is the cross-attention 

mechanism that incorporates temporal information, pro-cessed by the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO). We will discuss how the FNO processes temporal information, as well as details regarding the cross attention mechanism, later in this section. The third and final component in each decoder block is a position-wise feed-forward network (FFN), applied identically to each token: FFN( x) = W2 σ(W1 x + b1) + b2, (18) 5where W1 ∈ Rdf ×de , W2 ∈ Rde×df , σ(·) is a non-linear activation function (namely GeLU), and df is the feed-forward hidden dimension. This is also followed by a residual connection and layer normalization. Next, we discuss how our architecture handles tem-poral information. We use neural operators to process the time-dependent driving protocol H(t) and distill it into a set of context tokens that condition the trans-former wavefunction. In contrast to traditional neural networks, which map between finite-dimensional vectors, neural operators are generalizations that describe map-pings between function spaces defined over a domain of interest [45]. Here, the relevant domain is the time in-terval D = (0 , T max ). The neural operator in our archi-tecture is therefore an operator mapping from H(t) to 

M (t): 

N : H(t) −→ M (t). (19) Specifically, we choose the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) in our architecture due to its natural advantages in this setting: the FNO parameterizes the integral kernel directly in the frequency domain and has been shown to be discretization invariant [46, 55] (i.e., its performance depends minimally on the temporal resolution.) Further-more, FNOs are parameter-efficient and computationally fast due to implementation using (inverse) Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [45, 46]. Crucially, working in the fre-quency domain also provides an elegant route to comput-ing time derivatives, as we will discuss in Sec. III C. At each discretized time point tj (j = 1 , . . . , N t), the input to the FNO is a vector of time-dependent coeffi-cients of the Hamiltonian, expanded in the Pauli string basis: H(tj ) ∈ Rdin , where din is the number of time-dependent terms (equivalently, number of driving fields). A pointwise lifting layer first projects these coefficients to a higher-dimensional feature space of dimension dv :

v(0) (tj ) = WL H(tj ) + bL, WL ∈ Rdv ×din , bL ∈ Rdv ,

(20) producing a lifted representation V (0) ∈ RNt×dv .The core of the FNO is a stack of LF Fourier layers. In each layer ℓ, the representation V (ℓ) ∈ RNt×dv is first transformed to the frequency domain via a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) along the time axis. The transform is truncated to retain only the dominant kmax Fourier modes, yielding ˆV (ℓ) ∈ Rkmax ×dv . A learnable weight matrix then mixes these frequency modes: ˆV ′(ℓ) = R(ℓ) ˆV (ℓ), R(ℓ) ∈ Rdv ×dv , (21) where R(ℓ) is applied identically to each of the kmax 

modes. Since multiplication in the frequency domain corre-sponds to convolution in the time domain, each Fourier layer learns nonlocal temporal correlations and couples information of H(t) from different times. The filtered modes are transformed back to the time domain via an inverse FFT. A pointwise linear bias W (ℓ) 

> s

∈ Rdv ×dv is added, followed by a nonlinear activation σ:

V (ℓ+1) = σ



F−1 ˆV ′(ℓ)

+ V (ℓ) W (ℓ)

> s



. (22) After LF Fourier layers, the output is projected to a set of Nc context tokens. Concretely, at each point of time 

t, we lift the dv -dimensional output to be Nc × de dimen-sional through a two-layer, feed-forward network. Fi-nally, the output of this projection operation is reshaped to yield Nc raw context vectors, each of dimension de.This reshaping ensures that the dimension of each to-ken matches the embedding dimension of the transformer backbone, specifically: 

fM1(t), . . . , fMNc (t), fMi(t) ∈ Rde ∀ i, (23) Importantly, to satisfy the physical constraint that time evolution starts from a fixed initial state for all driving protocols H(t), we fix the initial context tokens, 

M (t = 0). We then offset the raw context tokens fM (t)outputted from the FNO by the raw initial values fM (0): 

M (t) ≡ N [H(t)]( t) = M (0) + fM (t) − fM (0) , (24) which explicitly defines the neural operator N . We note that these processed context tokens are functions of time :at each time t, they provide a de-dimensional summary of the driving protocol in latent space. The cross-attention mechanism bridges the two branches of the architecture: it allows the transformer, which processes the discrete spin degrees of freedom, to query the temporal information encoded by the FNO. This coupling is what enables the overall model to pre-dict the wavefunction conditioned on any driving proto-col H(t) at any time t ∈ (0 , T max ). In our architecture, the FNO plays a role analogous to encoders in encoder-decoder transformer structure [33]. Concretely, cross-attention appears as the second sub-layer in each decoder block (Fig. 1b). Let X′ ∈ RN ×de

denote the output of the self-attention sub-layer for a given block, and let M (t) ∈ RNc×de be the context ma-trix produced by the neural operator N at time t. The transformer representations serve as queries, while the context tokens provide the keys and values. For each of 

nh attention heads: 

Q(c) = W (c) 

> Q

X′, K(c) = W (c) 

> K

M (t), V (c) = W (c) 

> V

M (t),

(25) where W (c) 

> Q

∈ Rde×dh , W (c) 

> K

∈ Rde×dh , and W (c) 

> V

∈

Rde×dh . Note that the super-script ( c) denotes the weight matrices in the cross -attention mechanism. The output is: Attn (c) = softmax Q(c)K(c)⊤

√dh

!

V (c), (26) where the attention matrix has shape RN ×Nc : each of the N spin tokens attends to each of the Nc context 6

Embedding Pos. Encoding 

# σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N

# +

Decoder Layers 

Unembedding 

Softmax 

# log( p(σ; t)) ϕ(σ; t)

# (a) 

Masked Self-Attn 

# + Add & Norm 

Cross-Attention 

# + Add & Norm 

Feed-Forward 

# + Add & Norm 

# (b) 

# H(t)

Lifting 

FNO Layers 

Projection 

Raw Context 

fM (t)

Context 

M (t)

# (c) 

Condition 

FIG. 1. (a) Illustration of the architecture for transformer-based ansatz for quantum state. The input is a spin configuration, 

σ = {σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N }, σi ∈ {− 1, +1 }. The physical spins are first mapped to a de-dimensional latent space via an embed-ding operation, augmented by positional encodings that contain information about their spatial location. The latent space representations pass through LT decoder layers. The final latent state is projected by the unembedding layer to yield the log-amplitude log( p(σ; t)) and phase ϕ(σ; t). (b) Internal structure of each decoder block, showing the masked multi-head self-attention mechanism, residual connections, feed-forward network, and importantly the cross-attention mechanism that attends to temporal information. (c) Time-dependent driving protocols H(t) are processed by the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) and projected to raw context tokens fM (t), which are then offset by their initial values (Eq. 24) to respect the initial condition. The transformer wavefunction ansatz attends to the processed context tokens M (t) through a cross-attention mechanism. 

tokens. Unlike the self-attention mechanism, no causal mask is applied here, as every spin token should have ac-cess to the full temporal context. The heads are concate-nated and projected, followed by a residual connection and layer normalization, as in the case of self-attention (Eq. 17). We note that the cross-attention mechanism is not symmetric in X and M : intuitively, the cross-attention allows each spin’s latent representation to “look up” the relevant temporal context: how the driving fields are evolving at the current time t, and what temporal correla-tions the neural operator Nη has identified. Because the context tokens M (t) vary continuously with t (inheriting the smoothness of the FNO output), the transformer’s predictions also vary smoothly in time, without requir-ing any explicit time discretization in the wavefunction ansatz. In summary, our architecture couples a transformer-based variational wavefunction ansatz and a neural op-erator through cross attention. The two components han-dle the spin and physical degrees of freedom, respectively. The hyperparameters we used in the model are listed in Appendix. A. 

C. Training Procedure 

The trainable parameters of the NOQS consist of those in the transformer, the FNO, and the cross-attention pro-jection matrices. Let {θ, η } ∈ Rm denote the full set of parameters in the NOQS model, where m is the total number of parameters. The objective of training is to find an optimal set of parameters {θ∗, η ∗} that minimizes a loss function L.We define the loss function based on the Time-Dependent Variational Principle (TDVP) [42, 56, 57], which identifies the optimal trajectory within a varia-tional manifold (defined by the parameters θ), through minimizing the residual of the Schr¨ odinger equation (8): 

LTDVP =

ˆ

dt (i∂ t − H(t)) ψθ (Nη [H(t)]) 2. (27) This loss reaches its minimum, LTDVP = 0, if and only if 

ψθ (Nη [H(t)]) satisfies the Schr¨ odinger equation exactly, 7under time evolution governed by H(t). For larger systems, it is generally infeasible to ex-actly evaluate LTDVP ; instead, the loss must be evalu-ated stochastically. We rewrite the integrand using local estimators introduced in Sec. II. Expanding the norm and inserting a resolution of identity, we can express the TDVP loss at a fixed time t as: 

LTDVP (t) = ⟨ψθ |(i∂ t − H(t)) †(i∂ t − H(t)) |ψθ ⟩ (28) = X

> σ

pθ,η (σ) |Lloc (σ, t )|2 , (29) where the local estimator for Schr¨ odinger residual is: 

Lloc (σ, t ) = i ∂ t log ψθ (σ; Nη [H(t)]) − Eloc (σ, t ). (30) Here Eloc (σ, t ) is the local energy estimator defined in Eq. (7), and ∂t log ψθ (σ; Nη [H(t)]) is the time derivative of the logarithmic wavefunction. Both terms are esti-mated at each step of training. In practice, we exploit the gauge freedom of a global phase in the physical state and minimize the variance of |Lloc (σ, t )|2 at each t; for more details, see Appendix. A. A key advantage of processing the driving protocol us-ing the FNO is that the time derivative in Eq. 30 can be computed in frequency domain. Recall that the context tokens M (t) ≡ N η [H(t)] are produced by the FNO. Con-sequently, they inherit a Fourier representation from the internal layers. For any such function f (t) = P 

> k

ˆfk eiω k t,its time derivative is: 

∂tf (t) = X

> k

(iω k) ˆfk eiω k t, (31) which amounts to multiplying each Fourier coefficient by iω k, a pointwise operation in frequency space. Since the wavefunction ψθ (σ; M (t)) depends on time entirely 

through the context tokens M (t) via the cross-attention mechanism, the chain rule yields an exact expression for 

∂t log ψθ (σ; t) in terms of the Fourier coefficients, com-bined with automatic differentiation of the transformer ansatz. This avoids the numerical instabilities and de-pendence on discrete time grids with finite-difference ap-proximations. Performing the derivative in frequency domain allows the NOQS to inherit the discretization invariance of the FNO and transfer across temporal dis-cretizations, as we will show in Sec. IV C. As with any initial-condition PDE problem, it is cru-cial to ensure that the initial condition is enforced; i.e., to ensure that the output state at t = 0 matches |ψ0⟩

exactly. We approach this in a few complementary ways. First, we pre-train the NOQS to condition it on the given 

|ψ0⟩. During training, we also supplement the TDVP loss with an anchor term that enforces the initial condition: 

Lanchor = ψθ (Nη [H(t)])( t = 0) − | ψ0⟩ 2, (32) which penalizes deviations of the learned state from the known initial state at t = 0. Training with only the TDVP term (Eq. 30) might allow the initial state to drift during training, since the Schr¨ odinger equation con-strains only the time derivative. The anchor loss, there-fore, is particularly helpful for stabilizing the global phase of the wavefunction, which the TDVP loss leaves unde-termined modulo 2 π. The total loss function used during training is: 

L = LTDVP + λw Lanchor , (33) where λw is a hyperparameter controlling the strength of the initial-condition constraint. Along with the offset for the context token (Eq. 24), which enforces the initial condition on the level of the neural operator, the anchor loss additionally ensures that the initial condition is re-spected at the wavefunction level. At each training step, we sample a batch of B Hamil-tonian trajectories {H(b)(t)}Bb=1 from the training distri-bution. For each trajectory, we randomly select K time points {tk}, where tk ∈ (0 , T max ). Finally, at each time point, we draw M spin configurations {σ(m)} from the Born distribution pθ,η (σ) via autoregressive sampling. The loss and its gradients are then estimated by aver-aging over all three stochastically: 

L ≈ 1

BKM 

> B

X

> b=1
> K

X

> k=1
> M

X

> m=1

Lloc 



σ(m), t k; H(b) 2

+λw Lanchor .

(34) Details about the parameters used in training are also included in Appendix. A. We emphasize that, unlike standard VMC or single-trajectory TDVP, our training loop samples over both spin configurations and Hamiltonian trajectories at each step. This average over protocols, times, and configu-rations is what enables the model to learn the operator mapping of Eq. (10) across the full function space, rather than optimizing for individual trajectories. We also high-light that the whole training process does not require any external data. The whole architecture is trained using a physically motivated loss function, namely deviation from the Schr¨ odinger equation and the initial condition, in a self-supervised manner.   

> IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS A. TFIM with Transverse and Longitudinal Quench

To validate our approach, we consider a system of spin-1/2 degrees of freedom on an Lx × Ly square lattice with open boundary conditions (OBC). Specifically, we focus on the two-dimensional transverse-field Ising model (TFIM) with time-dependent longitudinal and transverse fields, which has been numerically studied and can be en-gineered on various experimental platforms [58–63]. The Hamiltonian reads: 

H(t) = J X

> ⟨ij ⟩

ZiZj + hx(t) X

> i

Xi + hz (t) X

> i

Zi, (35) 8where ⟨ij ⟩ denotes nearest-neighbor bonds on the square lattice, and Xi (Zi) is the Pauli-x (z) operator on site 

i. The functions hx(t) and hz (t) are the time-dependent transverse and longitudinal fields, respectively. A nonva-nishing longitudinal field hz (t) breaks the integrability of the model, making the dynamics nontrivial and preclud-ing analytical solutions. We fix J = 1 throughout. During training, the driv-ing fields hx(t) and hz (t) are sampled from a family of smooth, random trajectories generated via truncated Fourier series: 

hx(t) = hx0 +

> nmax

X

> m=1

am sin( mω t + ϕm), (36) and similarly for hz (t). Here nmax = 10 is the number of Fourier modes, ω = 10 J sets the fundamental fre-quency, and hx0 = 1 .0 J is a constant offset. The ampli-tudes am are drawn from a normal distribution with stan-dard deviation 0 .6 J/m 3/2; the mode-dependent normal-ization suppresses higher harmonics and ensures smooth-ness, while the phases ϕm are sampled uniformly from (0 , 2π]. The longitudinal field hz (t) is generated analo-gously but with a smaller amplitude scale (0 .05 J) and zero mean offset hz0 = 0. This parameterization pro-duces a diverse yet smooth ensemble of driving protocols for both training and evaluation. We stress that the NOQS framework holds for a given, fixed initial state. In this section, the initial state is cho-sen to be 

|ψ0⟩ = |+⟩⊗N , (37) where |+⟩ is the +1 eigenstate of Xi, and N is the sys-tem size. In the computational basis, |ψ0⟩ corresponds to the uniform superposition over all 2 N states. The perfor-mance of our framework applied to another state, namely a ferromagnetically ordered initial state, will be discussed in Appendix. C. To assess the performance of the wavefunction pro-duced by the NOQS, we analyze three observables: the average transverse magnetization 

⟨X(t)⟩ = 1

N

X

> i

⟨ψθ (t)|Xi|ψθ (t)⟩; (38) the nearest-neighbor ZZ correlator: 

⟨ZZ (t)⟩ = 1

Nb

X

> ⟨ij ⟩

⟨ψθ (t)|ZiZj |ψθ (t)⟩, (39) where Nb is the number of nearest-neighbor bonds; and the energy 

E(t) = ⟨H(t)⟩ = 1

N ⟨ψθ (t)|H(t)|ψθ (t)⟩, (40) where H(t) is the time-dependent Hamiltonian in Eq. 35. The three observables probe complementary aspects of the time-evolved state |ψ(t)⟩: ⟨X(t)⟩ is sensitive to           

> FIG. 2. Transverse field hx(t) and expectation values of local observables for system size 4 ×4, benchmarked against exact numerical results. (a) Performance of NOQS on predicting
> E(t) for in-distribution driving fields unseen during training. The NOQS also generalizes to out-of-distribution driving pro-tocols; for (b) Gaussian pulses and (c) tanh ramps. The NOQS model predicts local observables accurately in all three cases, indicating the learning of time-evolved quantum state under a functional space of driving fields.

the transverse polarization, ⟨ZZ (t)⟩ captures nearest-neighbor correlations, while E(t) incorporates informa-tion from both the driving fields, as well as expectation values ⟨X⟩, ⟨Z⟩, ⟨ZZ ⟩. Comparing the accuracy for pre-dicting the three observables tests the NOQS model’s ca-pability to capture not only the overall amplitude struc-ture but also the spatial correlation buildup during time evolution. We begin with a system of size 4 × 4, which can still be studied with Exact Diagonalization (ED) and provides a direct benchmark of our model’s performance against numerically exact results. In Fig. 2(a), we consider an instance of driving fields hx(t) and hz (t) drawn from the family described by Eq. 36 that has not been seen dur-ing training. The NOQS prediction of the energy E(t)(Eq. 40) matches almost perfectly with the exact results. Remarkably, the NOQS also generalizes to driving pro-tocols that are outside the training distribution. In Fig. 2(b) and (c), we consider two experimentally real-istic protocols: a Gaussian pulse and a ramp-up (repre-sented by tanh) for the longitudinal and transverse fields. Despite never encountering such functional forms dur-ing training, the NOQS demonstrates excellent predictive power and captures both ⟨X(t)⟩ and ⟨ZZ (t)⟩ accurately, confirming that the model has indeed learned a map-9                

> FIG. 3. Performance of the NOQS on a 4 ×8 lattice ( N= 32), benchmarked against tDMRG ( χ= 256). The three driving protocols are the same as those in Fig. 2. (a) Energy E(t) obtained from the NOQS predictions, matching almost perfectly with tDMRG results. (b) Average transverse magnetization ⟨X(t)⟩for the Gaussian pulse driving protocol. (c) ⟨ZZ (t)⟩for a tanh ramp protocol. Both Gaussian and tanh protocols are out of the training distribution. Despite the exponentially larger Hilbert space compared to a 4 ×4 system, the NOQS predictions of local observables and correlators remain accurate.

ping between functional spaces , instead of memorizing in-family trajectories. Next we demonstrate the NOQS’s performance on a 4 × 8 lattice ( N = 32 spins). Such system sizes are beyond the reach of exact numerical methods. This is indeed the regime in which NQS have been the most powerful, owing to the expressivity of neural networks that represent quantum states in an exponentially large Hilbert space. Here we benchmark the observables pre-dicted by NOQS against time-dependent Density-Matrix Renormalization Group (tDMRG) calculations. We have verified convergence in the bond dimensions, and details about the implementation are in Appendix. B. In Fig. 3, we demonstrate the NOQS’s performance for this larger system size. Across the three panels, we con-sider the same driving protocols as in Fig. 2. Despite the exponentially larger Hilbert space, the predicted observ-able dynamics tracks the results from tDMRG closely. These results highlight the scalability of our approach and its ability to capture dynamics in regimes where ex-act computations becomes prohibitive.  

> B. Fine-Tuning

While our NOQS model can be trained using physical loss alone, as detailed in Sec. III C, a key advantage of our framework is its ability to incorporate experimental data. In this section, we demonstrate this capability through fine-tuning. In modern machine learning, foundation models such as large language models, are first pre-trained on broad datasets, and then fine-tuned on task-specific data to im-prove performance in targeted domains. Our training procedure in Sec. III C plays an analogous role: it serves as a general-purpose, foundational training stage. In this pre-training stage, the NOQS learns to map the func-tion space of driving protocols to time-evolved quantum states. We can further fine-tune the model on a specific 

instance of hx(t) and hz (t) using a small number of ex-perimentally accessible measurements. Concretely, suppose that for a particular driving proto-col, measurements of ⟨X(tm)⟩ and ⟨ZZ (tm)⟩ are available at a sparse set of points in time, {tm}. Such exact results could be obtained from experiments or numerical simula-tions. We fine-tune the network parameters θ with a loss term that penalizes deviations of the NOQS predictions from these measured values: 

Ldata = X

> m

(⟨X(tm)⟩θ − ⟨ X(tm)⟩exp )2

+ ( ⟨ZZ (tm)⟩θ − ⟨ ZZ (tm)⟩exp )2 , (41) where the subscript θ denotes NOQS predictions and exp denotes the ground truths of ⟨X⟩ and ⟨ZZ ⟩, possibly obtained from experiments. In Fig. 4, we show the effect of fine-tuning for the two out-of-distribution protocols from Fig. 3: the Gaussian pulse in (b) and the tanh ramp in (c), for system size 4 × 8. Using measurements of only ⟨X⟩ and ⟨ZZ ⟩ at four time points, the fine-tuned NOQS yields noticeably improved predictions for local observables and the energy, across the entire time interval. We emphasize that in contrast to Ref. [26], which trains NQS further on unseen system parameters, our fine-tuning stage only involves the data loss (Eq. 41), and the TDVP loss is no longer used. The improvements in E(t), which involves not only ⟨X⟩ and ⟨ZZ ⟩, but also 

⟨Z⟩, reflect the fact that fine-tuning on sparse measure-ments improves the quality of the full underlying wave-function. This is possible because the pre-trained model already encodes a physically consistent state; the sparse data serve to further refine it, rather than reconstruct it from scratch. Our result highlights a practical advantage of the NOQS framework: a pre-trained model can already pre-dict local observables accurately, for unseen instances of driving (Fig. 3). With only a handful of easily accessible measurements, one can increase the accuracy even fur-ther for specific driving protocols. Our framework can be readily adapted to specific experimental conditions, with-out retraining from scratch. Moreover, the fine-tuning stage is extremely cheap, as the loss function is simply 10            

> FIG. 4. Performance of NOQS after fine-tuning, for (a) the Gaussian pulse and (b) tanh driving protocols, at a system size 4 ×8. Using only measurements of Xand ZZ at four points in time, the Post Fine-Tune predictions become even more accurate for the out-of-distribution fields across the en-tire time interval.

trying to penalize deviations from the sparse measure-ments (Eq. 41). The workflow in our model mirrors the pre-train and fine-tune paradigm that has proven effec-tive across machine learning, and it opens the door to hybrid computational-experimental approaches for quan-tum dynamics.  

> C. Transferability Across Discretizations

Compared to conventional neural networks, Fourier Neural Operators (FNO) have a remarkable capacity to transfer between different discretizations of the un-derlying domain [45, 46]. This property arises because the FNO parameterizes the integral kernel in frequency space, rather than learning pointwise mappings tied to specific grids. The Fourier representation can then be evaluated at arbitrary time points, regardless of the un-derlying resolution. For classical partial differential equa-tions, discretization invariance has been established as a key advantage of FNO-based solvers, enabling zero-shot generalization to finer spatiotemporal grids without re-training [46]. This transferability has also been demon-strated for FNO treatments of time-periodic quantum systems [55]. In our current architecture, the time-dependence of the quantum state comes entirely from the context tokens 

M (t), which are produced by the FNO. This architec-tural choice of NOQS allows it to inherit the temporal discretization invariance of the FNO. To test this, we take the NOQS that has been trained on a temporal grid of Nt = 200 evenly spaced time points. Without any retraining, fine-tuning, or interpolation, we evaluate the model on a finer grid of Nt = 400 points.                     

> FIG. 5. Temporal super-resolution of the NOQS on a 4 ×4lattice. The model is trained on Nt= 200 time points and evaluated on Nt= 400 points, without retraining .(a) Abso-lute error |∆X(t)|=|⟨ X(t)⟩NOQS − ⟨ X(t)⟩exact |for a Gaus-sian pulse driving protocol. (b) Absolute error |∆ZZ (t)|for a tanh ramp protocol. The smooth error profiles confirm that the NOQS inherits the discretization invariance of the Fourier Neural Operator. Trained on a coarse grid, the NOQS is ca-pable of predicting at finer temporal resolutions accurately.

This constitutes a zero-shot temporal super-resolution: the model is asked to predict at times it has never en-countered during training. In Fig. 5, we show the abso-lute deviation of the NOQS predictions from exact com-putations for ⟨X(t)⟩ under a Gaussian pulse protocol and ⟨ZZ (t)⟩ under a tanh ramp. The error profiles are smooth and remain small throughout the time interval, with no artifacts, discontinuities, or oscillations at the scale of the training grid spacing. This confirms that the full NOQS architecture exhibits discretization invariance. This property furthers the practical value of our frame-work. An experimentalist interested in resolving fast dynamics, or in comparing predictions against data ac-quired at a non-uniform set of measurement times, can query the same pre-trained model on other temporal grids. In contrast, methods that discretize time evolu-tion into fixed steps, such as Trotterized circuits or finite-difference TDVP integrators, inevitably require either re-training or additional computational steps to increase the temporal resolution. Thus, the NOQS architecture, by design, combines the flexibility of a continuous-time rep-resentation with the expressivity of a discrete many-body ansatz.  

> V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

In this work, we propose the Neural Operator Quan-tum State (NOQS), a novel architecture that learns the solution operator of the Schr¨ odinger equation across a function space of driving protocols. By coupling a neu-ral operator realized via FNO, which processes the con-tinuous, temporal structure of the driving fields, to a transformer-based autoregressive wavefunction through cross-attention, the NOQS predicts time-evolved quan-tum states not only for unseen protocols in distribution, but also for out-of-distribution but experimentally rel-evant driving fields. The entire model is trained in a 11 self-supervised way using a physically motivated loss, re-quiring no external data from exact numerics, tensor net-works, or experiments. As a numerical demonstration, we applied the NOQS to study a two-dimensional transverse-field Ising model with time-dependent transverse and integrability-breaking longitudinal fields. Our model accurately predicts local observables and correlators, which are benchmarked against exact diagonalization and time-dependent DMRG. Crucially, the NOQS generalizes to out-of-distribution protocols, including Gaussian pulses and ramps, which are qualitatively different from the truncated Fourier series used during training. We fur-ther demonstrated that the NOQS inherits the discretiza-tion invariance of its FNO backbone: a model trained on 

Nt = 200 time points produces accurate predictions when evaluated on a finer grid of Nt = 400 points, achieving zero-shot temporal super-resolution. Both results con-firm that the model learns a genuine functional mapping rather than memorizing individual trajectories on fixed discretizations. Finally, we showed that a pre-trained NOQS can be fine-tuned with sparse measurements of lo-cal observables, improving the accuracy of the full quan-tum state, at negligible additional cost. There are a few natural directions for future work. First, the current NOQS can transfer across a func-tion space of protocols, but at fixed coupling constants (namely J). An architecture that additionally conditions on static parameters such as interaction strengths, disor-ders, or dissipation rates would enable a single model to span a joint space of protocols and static parameters. This direction could be relevant for driven-dissipative quantum systems [64–66], which depend on both time-dependent functions, as well as dissipation strengths. On the more theory side of investigations, one could ask: what types of driving fields are easier or harder to learn? Does the learnability transition in the presence of disorder or near critical points? Finally, how much information does the context token M (t) encode? Can we learn some aspects of the quantum dynamics from the evolution of these context tokens? Insights into these questions will allow for a better understanding of the limitations and capabilities of the NOQS model. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ZQ acknowledges discussions with Junkai Dong. YP is supported by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) Grants No. PHY-2216774 and No. DMR-2406524. 

> Appendix A: Hyperparameter Choice and Loss Implementation

To ensure reproducibility, in this Appendix, we list the details of our model architecture and training procedure. As discussed in Sec. III B in detail, our model architec-ture consists of a Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) and a transformer, which are coupled through a cross-attention mechanism. Parameters in the Transformer consist of the number of decoder layers, the latent (embedding) space dimension, as well as the number of attention heads. Af-ter the decoder blocks, there is also a two-layer, fully-connected unembedding network with intermediate di-mension df . Similarly, parameters of the FNO include the number of layers, the model width, and the number of modes that are kept in frequency domain. We have empirically verified that the model performance depends most strongly on the FNO width and transformer em-bedding dimension. We list the hyperparameters for the NOQS model in the first two parts of Table. A. We also list the hyperparameters used in training and fine-tuning. We use the Adam optimizer with a sched-uled, decaying learning rate, which helps stabilize train-ing. Other details about training are included in Ta-ble. A. In practice, rather than minimizing the raw expecta-tion LTDVP (t) in Eq. (29) directly, we minimize the vari-ance of |Lloc (σ, t )|2 over the sample configurations σ at each time t. This choice is motivated by the following argument: if the optimization is exact, so that Lloc (σ, t )becomes σ-independent, i.e., 

Lloc (σ, t ) ≡ c(t), ∀ σ, (A1) for some scalar c(t) ∈ R, then the Schr¨ odinger resid-ual reduces to a global, configuration-independent phase. Since physical states are defined only up to a global phase, such a solution corresponds to the correct physi-cal state satisfying the time-dependent Schr¨ odinger equa-tion. We therefore minimize the variance 

Var σ [Lloc (σ, t )] = Eσ



Lloc (σ, t ) − Lloc (t) 2

, (A2) where Lloc (t) denotes the sample mean. This serves as a more stable and gauge-invariant training objective: it drives the residual toward a σ-independent constant, thereby enforcing the correct quantum dynamics while remaining insensitive to the unphysical global phase. 

> Appendix B: Technical Details on tDMRG Implementation

For a system of size 4 × 8, exact time evolution is no longer feasible due to the exponential growth of system size. We therefore use time-dependent Density Matrix Renormalization Group (tDMRG) as a benchmark for observable dynamics. We choose the threshold for SVD truncation to be 10 −12 . The bond dimension χ has been verified to con-verge; we fix χ = 256 in Fig. 3 throughout for compar-ison with NOQS predictions. The tDMRG calculations are implemented with the TeNPy package [69, 70]. 12 

Hyperparameter Architecture (Transformer) 

Number of Decoder Layers ( NT ) 3Embedding Dimension ( de) 128 Number of Attention Heads ( nh) 8 Feed-forward Dimension ( df ) 4 × de = 512 Activation Function σ GeLU [67] 

Architecture (FNO) 

Number of FNO Layers ( NF ) 3FNO Width ( dv ) 96 FNO frequency modes ( kmax ) 64 Number of Context Tokens ( NC ) 4 Number of Points in Time 200 

Training 

Optimizer Adam [68] Initial Learning Rate (LR) 4 × 10 −4

LR decay factor 0.95 LR decay rate 2000 (steps) Minimum LR 4 × 10 −6

Batch size ( B) 4Time points per step ( K) 3MC sample per step ( M ) 128 Training Steps 60000 Weight of Anchor Loss ( λw ) 10.0 

Fine Tuning 

Training Steps 300 Learning Rate 3 × 10 −4

Number of Data Points 4TABLE I. Hyperparameters for the Neural-Operator Quan-tum State Model, for system size 4 × 4. For the system size 4 × 8, the only changes are in the number of decoders, FNO layers, and context tokens: NT = 3 → 4; NF = 3 → 4; 

NC = 4 → 8. 

Appendix C: NOQS Performance on a Ferromagnetic Initial State 

In the main text, we have focused on the case with a paramagnetically ordered initial state (Eq. 37). However, our NOQS architecture as well as training procedure can be readily adapted to different initial state. In this Ap-pendix, we demonstrate the model’s performance for the ferromagnetically ordered initial state: 

|ψferro 0 ⟩ = O

> i

| ↑⟩ i, (C1) where | ↑⟩ i denotes the eigenstate of 2 Zi with eigenvalue +1. In Fig. 6, we demonstrate that for the ferromag-netic initial state, the NOQS captures local observables accurately, again for both in-distribution and out-of-distribution driving protocols. We highlight that the drivings are different from those in the main text (Fig. 2), which further supports that the NOQS achieves learning not for particular protocol instances, but over a function space of drivings. 

FIG. 6. NOQS performance on a ferromagnetically ordered initial state (Eq. C1) benchmarked against exact results, for a 4 × 4 lattice. For both (a) in-distribution and (b,c) out-of-distribution driving protocols, the NOQS accurately captures the local observables. [1] U. Schollw¨ ock, The density-matrix renormalization group, Reviews of Modern Physics 77 , 259 (2005). [2] U. Schollw¨ ock, The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product states, Annals of Physics 

326 , 96 (2011). [3] S. R. White, Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups, Physical Review Letters 69 ,2863 (1992). [4] S. R. White, Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormalization groups, Physical Review B 48 , 10345 (1993). [5] S. ¨Ostlund and S. Rommer, Thermodynamic limit of den-sity matrix renormalization, Physical Review Letters 75 ,3537 (1995). [6] J. I. Cirac, D. P´ erez-Garc´ ıa, N. Schuch, and F. Ver-straete, Matrix product states and projected entangled 13 

pair states: Concepts, symmetries, theorems, Reviews of Modern Physics 93 , 10.1103/revmodphys.93.045003 (2021). [7] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac, Renormalization al-gorithms for quantum-many body systems in two and higher dimensions (2004), arXiv:cond-mat/0407066 [cond-mat.str-el]. [8] F. Verstraete, V. Murg, and J. Cirac, Matrix product states, projected entangled pair states, and variational renormalization group methods for quantum spin sys-tems, Advances in Physics 57 , 143–224 (2008). [9] J. Jordan, R. Or´ us, G. Vidal, F. Verstraete, and J. I. Cirac, Classical simulation of infinite-size quantum lat-tice systems in two spatial dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

101 , 250602 (2008). [10] Z.-X. Li and H. Yao, Sign-problem-free fermionic quan-tum monte carlo: Developments and applications, An-nual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 10 , 337 (2019). [11] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, Multilayer feedforward networks are universal approximators, Neu-ral Networks 2, 359 (1989). [12] G. Cybenko, Approximation by superpositions of a sig-moidal function, Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems 2, 303 (1989). [13] K. Hornik, Approximation capabilities of multilayer feed-forward networks, Neural Networks 4, 251 (1991). [14] H. Lange, F. D¨ oschl, J. M. Boehnlein, G. Mazzola, N. A. Modine, M. J. Scherer, and A. Mezzacapo, A review of neural quantum states, Quantum Science and Technology 

9, 040501 (2024). [15] M. Medvidovi´ c and J. R. Moreno, Neural-network quantum states for many-body physics, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11014 10.48550/arXiv.2402.11014 (2024). [16] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks, Science 

355 , 602 (2017). [17] Y.-H. Zhang and M. Di Ventra, Transformer quantum state: A multipurpose model for quantum many-body problems, Phys. Rev. B 107 , 075147 (2023). [18] K. Choo, G. Carleo, N. Regnault, and T. Ne-upert, Symmetries and many-body excited states with neural-network quantum states, arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03325 (2018). [19] G. Pescia, J. Han, A. Lovato, J. Lu, and G. Carleo, Neural-network quantum states for periodic systems in continuous space, Physical Review Research 4, 023138 (2022). [20] G. Torlai, G. Mazzola, J. Carrasquilla, M. Troyer, R. Melko, and G. Carleo, Neural-network quantum state tomography, Nature physics 14 , 447 (2018). [21] I. L. Guti´ errez and C. B. Mendl, Real time evolution with neural-network quantum states, Quantum 6, 627 (2022). [22] A. Van de Walle, M. Schmitt, and A. Bohrdt, Many-body dynamics with explicitly time-dependent neural quan-tum states, Machine Learning: Science and Technology 

6, 045011 (2025). [23] A. Sinibaldi, D. Hendry, F. Vicentini, and G. Carleo, Time-dependent neural galerkin method for quantum dy-namics (2025), arXiv:2412.11778 [quant-ph]. [24] J. Nys, Z. Denis, and G. Carleo, Real-time quantum dy-namics of thermal states with neural thermofields, Phys. Rev. B 109 , 235120 (2024). [25] Z. Denis and G. Carleo, Accurate neural quantum states for interacting lattice bosons, Quantum 9, 1772 (2025). [26] R. Rende, S. Goldt, F. Becca, and L. L. Viteritti, Fine-tuning neural network quantum states, Physical Review Research 6, 043280 (2024). [27] D. Wu, R. Rossi, F. Vicentini, N. Astrakhantsev, F. Becca, X. Cao, J. Carrasquilla, F. Ferrari, A. Georges, M. Hibat-Allah, M. Imada, A. M. L¨ auchli, G. Mazzola, A. Mezzacapo, A. Millis, J. Robledo Moreno, T. Neupert, Y. Nomura, J. Nys, O. Parcollet, R. Pohle, I. Romero, M. Schmid, J. M. Silvester, S. Sorella, L. F. Tocchio, L. Wang, S. R. White, A. Wietek, Q. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and G. Carleo, Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems, Science 386 , 296–301 (2024). [28] S.-H. Lin and F. Pollmann, Scaling of neural-network quantum states for time evolution, physica status solidi (b) 259 , 2100172 (2022). [29] L. Gravina, V. Savona, and F. Vicentini, Neural pro-jected quantum dynamics: a systematic study, Quantum 

9, 1803 (2025). [30] Y. Levine, O. Sharir, N. Cohen, and A. Shashua, Quan-tum entanglement in deep learning architectures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122 , 065301 (2019). [31] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, and J. Zhang, A review of recurrent neural networks: Lstm cells and network architectures, Neural computation 31 , 1235 (2019). [32] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, 

Learning internal representations by error propagation ,Tech. Rep. (1985). [33] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, At-tention is all you need, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [34] O. Sharir, Y. Levine, N. Wies, G. Carleo, and A. Shashua, Deep autoregressive models for the efficient variational simulation of many-body quantum systems, Physical Re-view Letters 124 , 020503 (2020). [35] M. Hibat-Allah, M. Ganahl, L. E. Hayward, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla, Recurrent neural network wave func-tions, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 023358 (2020). [36] T. D. Barrett, A. Malyshev, and A. Lvovsky, Autoregres-sive neural-network wavefunctions for ab initio quantum chemistry, Nature Machine Intelligence 4, 351 (2022). [37] D. Luo, Z. Chen, K. Hu, Z. Zhao, V. M. Hur, and B. K. Clark, Gauge-invariant and anyonic-symmetric au-toregressive neural network for quantum lattice models, Phys. Rev. Res. 5, 013216 (2023). [38] E. Ibarra-Garc´ ıa-Padilla, H. Lange, R. G. Melko, R. T. Scalettar, J. Carrasquilla, A. Bohrdt, and E. Khatami, Autoregressive neural quantum states of fermi hubbard models, Phys. Rev. Res. 7, 013122 (2025). [39] D. Luo, Z. Chen, J. Carrasquilla, and B. K. Clark, Au-toregressive neural network for simulating open quantum systems via a probabilistic formulation, Physical Review Letters 128 , 090501 (2022). [40] K. Donatella, Z. Denis, A. L. Boit´ e, and C. Ciuti, Dy-namics with autoregressive neural quantum states: Ap-plication to critical quench dynamics, Physical Review A 

108 , 022210 (2023). [41] A. Malyshev, J. M. Arrazola, and A. Lvovsky, Autore-gressive neural quantum states with quantum number symmetries, arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04166 (2023). [42] M. Schmitt and M. Heyl, Quantum many-body dynamics in two dimensions with artificial neural networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 , 100503 (2020). 14 

[43] R. Rende, L. L. Viteritti, F. Becca, A. Scardicchio, A. Laio, and G. Carleo, Foundation neural-networks quantum states as a unified ansatz for multiple hamil-tonians, Nature communications 16 , 7213 (2025). [44] T. Zaklama, M. Geier, and L. Fu, Large electron model: A universal ground state predictor, arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02346 (2026). [45] N. Kovachki, Z. Li, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhat-tacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar, Neural opera-tor: Learning maps between function spaces with appli-cations to PDEs, Journal of Machine Learning Research 

24 , 1 (2023). [46] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhat-tacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar, Fourier neu-ral operator for parametric partial differential equations, in International Conference on Learning Representations 

(2021) arXiv:2010.08895. [47] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhat-tacharya, A. Stuart, and A. Anandkumar, Neural oper-ator: Graph kernel network for partial differential equa-tions (2020), arXiv:2003.03485 [cs.LG]. [48] J. Chen, S. Cheng, H. Xie, L. Wang, and T. Xiang, Equiv-alence of restricted boltzmann machines and tensor net-work states, Physical Review B 97 , 085104 (2018). [49] R. G. Melko, G. Carleo, J. Carrasquilla, and J. I. Cirac, Restricted boltzmann machines in quantum physics, Na-ture Physics 15 , 887 (2019). [50] Y. Nomura, Helping restricted boltzmann machines with quantum-state representation by restoring symmetry, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 33 , 174003 (2021). [51] T. Vieijra, C. Casert, J. Nys, W. De Neve, J. Haegeman, J. Ryckebusch, and F. Verstraete, Restricted boltzmann machines for quantum states with non-abelian or anyonic symmetries, Physical review letters 124 , 097201 (2020). [52] L. L. Viteritti, R. Rende, and F. Becca, Transformer vari-ational wave functions for frustrated quantum spin sys-tems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130 , 236401 (2023). [53] L. L. Viteritti, R. Rende, A. Parola, S. Goldt, and F. Becca, Transformer wave function for two dimensional frustrated magnets: Emergence of a spin-liquid phase in the shastry-sutherland model, Phys. Rev. B 111 , 134411 (2025). [54] Z. Qi and C. Earls, Attention in krylov space (2026), arXiv:2601.07937 [quant-ph]. [55] Z. Qi, Y. Peng, and C. Earls, Fourier neural operators for time-periodic quantum systems: Learning Floquet hamiltonians, observable dynamics, and operator growth (2025), arXiv:2509.07084 [quant-ph]. [56] A. D. McLachlan, A variational solution of the time-dependent Schr¨ odinger equation, Molecular Physics 8, 39 (1964). [57] J. Haegeman, J. I. Cirac, T. J. Osborne, I. Piˇ zorn, H. Ver-schelde, and F. Verstraete, Time-dependent variational principle for quantum lattices, Physical Review Letters 

107 , 070601 (2011). [58] T. Hashizume, I. P. McCulloch, and J. C. Halimeh, Dynamical phase transitions in the two-dimensional transverse-field ising model, Physical Review Research 

4, 013250 (2022). [59] J. Richter, T. Heitmann, and R. Steinigeweg, Quantum quench dynamics in the transverse-field Ising model: A numerical expansion in linked rectangular clusters, Sci-Post Phys. 9, 031 (2020). [60] P. Scholl, M. Schuler, H. J. Williams, A. A. Eberharter, D. Barredo, K.-N. Schymik, V. Lienhard, L.-P. Henry, T. C. Lang, T. Lahaye, A. M. L¨ auchli, and A. Browaeys, Quantum simulation of 2d antiferromagnets with hun-dreds of rydberg atoms, Nature 595 , 233–238 (2021). [61] S. Ebadi, T. T. Wang, H. Levine, A. Keesling, G. Se-meghini, A. Omran, D. Bluvstein, R. Samajdar, H. Pich-ler, W. W. Ho, S. Choi, S. Sachdev, M. Greiner, V. Vuleti´ c, and M. D. Lukin, Quantum phases of matter on a 256-atom programmable quantum simulator, Nature 

595 , 227–232 (2021). [62] J. Vovrosh, S. Juli` a-Farr´ e, W. Krinitsin, M. Kaicher, F. Hayes, E. Gottlob, A. Kshetrimayum, K. Bidzhiev, S. B. J¨ ager, M. Schmitt, J. Tindall, C. Dalyac, T. Mendes-Santos, and A. Dauphin, Simulating dynam-ics of the two-dimensional transverse-field ising model: a comparative study of large-scale classical numerics (2025), arXiv:2511.19340 [quant-ph]. [63] P. Schauss, Quantum simulation of transverse Ising mod-els with Rydberg atoms, Quantum Science and Technol-ogy 3, 023001 (2018), arXiv:1706.09014 [physics.atom-ph]. [64] L. M. Sieberer, S. D. Huber, E. Altman, and S. Diehl, Dynamical critical phenomena in driven-dissipative sys-tems, Physical review letters 110 , 195301 (2013). [65] A. Tomadin, S. Diehl, and P. Zoller, Nonequilibrium phase diagram of a driven and dissipative many-body system, Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Op-tical Physics 83 , 013611 (2011). [66] K. Le Hur, L. Henriet, L. Herviou, K. Plekhanov, A. Petrescu, T. Goren, M. Schiro, C. Mora, and P. P. Orth, Driven dissipative dynamics and topology of quan-tum impurity systems, Comptes Rendus. Physique 19 ,451–483 (2018). [67] D. Hendrycks and K. Gimpel, Gaussian error linear units (GELUs) (2016), arXiv:1606.08415. [68] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochas-tic optimization, in International Conference on Learning Representations (2015) arXiv:1412.6980. [69] J. Hauschild and F. Pollmann, Efficient numerical sim-ulations with tensor networks: Tensor network python (tenpy), SciPost Physics Lecture Notes 10.21468/scipost-physlectnotes.5 (2018). [70] J. Hauschild, J. Unfried, S. Anand, B. Andrews, M. Bintz, U. Borla, S. Divic, J. Geiger, M. Hefel, K. H´ emery, W. Kadow, J. Kemp, N. Kirchner, V. S. Liu, G. M¨ oller, D. Parker, M. Rader, A. Romen, S. Scalet, L. Schoonderwoerd, M. Schulz, T. Soejima, P. Thoma, Y. Wu, P. Zechmann, L. Zweng, R. S. K. Mong, M. P. Zaletel, and F. Pollmann, Tensor network python (tenpy) version 1, SciPost Physics Codebases , 41 (2024).