Title: Deep Research of Deep Research: From Transformer to Agent, From AI to AI for Science

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28361v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:29:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Deep Research of Deep Research: From Transformer to Agent, From AI to AI for Science 

Yipeng Yu *

Abstract 

With the advancement of large language mod-els (LLMs) in their knowledge base and rea-soning capabilities, their interactive modalities have evolved from pure text to multimodality and further to agentic tool use. Consequently, their applications have broadened from ques-tion answering to AI assistants and now to general-purpose agents. Deep research (DR) represents a prototypical vertical application for general-purpose agents, which represents an ideal approach for intelligent information processing and assisting humans in discovering and solving problems, with the goal of reach-ing or even surpassing the level of top human scientists. This paper provides a deep research of deep research. We articulate a clear and precise definition of deep research and unify perspectives from industry’s deep research and academia’s AI for Science (AI4S) within a de-velopmental framework. We position LLMs and Stable Diffusion as the twin pillars of gen-erative AI, and lay out a roadmap evolving from the Transformer to agents. We examine the progress of AI4S across various disciplines. We identify the predominant paradigms of human-AI interaction and prevailing system architec-tures, and discuss the major challenges and fundamental research issues that remain. AI supports scientific innovation, and science also can contribute to AI growth (Science for AI, S4AI). We hope this paper can help bridge the gap between the AI and AI4S communities. 

Keywords: Deep Research, AI for Science, AI4S, LLM, Diffusion, Agent, Agentic AI, AI Scientist, Scaling law, GenAI, Generative AI. 

1 Introduction 

“Mind the risks of AI, but fear the halt of its progress more.” — This paper  

> *Email: yypzju@163.com

Since the emergence of ChatGPT on 30 Nov 2022, nations have gradually become aware of the tremendous advances in AI and have recognized its strategic significance. The European Commis-sion has launched the “European Strategy for Ar-tificial Intelligence (AI)” to harness the potential of AI technologies in science and support scien-tists to adopt them for their research on 8 Oct 2025. The White House of the United States has also launched the “Genesis Mission” which aims to win the AI race on 24 Nov 2025. The aca-demic community has increasingly applied LLMs to cutting-edge research areas such as biology (Gao et al., 2024; Rao et al., 2026), chemistry & ma-terials (Tom et al., 2024), healthcare (Ong et al., 2026), mathematics (Ju and Dong, 2026; Wang et al., 2026a), physics, medicine, meteorology, and other fields (Gao and Wang, 2024; Gil and Moler, 2025; Chugunova et al., 2026), while industry has begun rolling out next-generation search engines capable of deep research, such as Google Deep-Mind, OpenAI, and Perplexity. Unquestionably, as the capabilities of AI ad-vance and its applications broaden, its integration into the research domain will feature progressively higher levels of automation and intelligence. How-ever, “deep research” is a concept that has only emerged within the past two years and currently lacks a unified definition. Its relationship with sim-ilar concepts, such as “deep search” and “AI sci-entist”, also remains ambiguous. Moreover, con-strained by disparate resources and environments, industry and academia exhibit divergent motiva-tions, methodologies, and outcomes in their studies of LLMs and deep research. Furthermore, AI re-searchers often have limited understanding of the research pain points of AI4S researchers, while many AI4S researchers are uncertain about the ex-tent to which AI can contribute to their work. This results in a gap between the two communities. On the other hand, the majority of current publi-1

> arXiv:2603.28361v1 [cs.AI] 30 Mar 2026

cations on deep research have not undergone rigor-ous peer review, as many are preprints released on platforms such as arXiv and bioRxiv. Consequently, their quality cannot be guaranteed. Furthermore, the few existing survey papers on the topic often fail to provide a comprehensive overview of deep research. They also lack the clarity and broad ap-plicability necessary to be accessible and useful across different research communities. In response to these existing issues, we con-ducted a deep research of deep research. We began by providing a precise definition of the concept and distinguishing it from related notions. Subse-quently, we carried out a comprehensive investiga-tion and synthesis of deep research as practiced in both industry and academia. We present the evolu-tion of AI from the Transformer to agents to help AI4S scientists understand core principles. Addi-tionally, we demonstrate how these scientists apply AI within their specific research fields. These prac-tical insights assist AI researchers in refining and iterating deep research agents. 

2 Related Work 

As this area is relatively nascent, only a few sur-veys exist. Wang examined breakthroughs over the past decade that include self-supervised learning and geometric deep learning (Wang et al., 2023a). Mo conducted a review of conversational search systems which focuses on four modules: query reformulation, search clarification, conversational retrieval, and response generation (Mo et al., 2025). Lin surveyed the agentic RL foundations of search systems (Lin et al., 2025). Xi analyzed and cat-egorized the LLM-based search agents from the perspectives of architecture, optimization, appli-cation and evaluation (Xi et al., 2025). Li pro-vided an overview of RL-based agentic search, including methods, evaluation, applications, and challenges (Li et al., 2025g). Zhang provided a systematic overview of the DR pipeline, which comprises four core stages: planning, question developing, web exploration, and report genera-tion (Zhang et al., 2025d). Ren reviewed the ar-chitectures, design, benchmarks, applications, and ethical considerations surrounding LLM-based sci-entific agents (Ren et al., 2025). Shi understood DR from three progressive phases (agentic search, integrated search, and AI scientist) and introduced four key components (query planning, information acquisition, memory management, and answer gen-Deep Research Resarch Agent AI Scientist           

> Summary Deep Survey Deep Review Search Review Research
> RAG Deep Search Search Agent
> +LLM +LLM +LLM
> Solution Explanation Validation Application
> Problem Question Finding Hypothesis
> Simulation Experimental Environment (SEE) Real Experimental Environment (REE) Internet Digital Environment (IDE)
> XYZ

Figure 1: An overview of deep research. 

eration) (Shi et al., 2025a). Xu defined the scope of DR, and explored the architectural patterns, implementation approaches, and domain-specific adaptations (Xu and Peng, 2025). Hu reviewed the scientific LLMs from the perspectives of data, model architectures, and agent-based systems (Hu et al., 2025a). Wei offered a domain-oriented re-view of autonomous scientific discovery across life sciences, chemistry, materials, and physics, syn-thesizing research progress and advances within each discipline (Wei et al., 2025b). Huang con-ducted an analysis of the foundational technologies and architectural components that constitute DR agents (Huang et al., 2025b). However, existing surveys lack a clear definition of deep research. They often define it narrowly as an agent of search and report generation, and fail to distinguish it from related concepts. Fur-thermore, they provide little discussion on the col-laborative roles of humans and AI, nor do they thoroughly address the gap between industrial ap-plications and academic research. Consequently, many critical questions remain unresolved for the audience. This is especially true for researchers from AI4S. In contrast, our work is not merely an-other survey. Instead, we offer a deep research of deep research. Specifically, we provide a unified and evolving perspective by comprehensively in-vestigating principles, dataset/benchmarks, models, agents, applications, and challenges. We also artic-ulate promising directions for achieving AGI. Our work can guide and inspire future research for AI and AI4S. 23 Definition and Differences 

Research is the systematic and diligent inquiry or investigation to discover and interpret facts, gener-ate new knowledge, and gain a deeper understand-ing of a subject. Research typically comprises basic research and applied research, and it is expected to be reproducible and subjected to peer review. As shown in Figure 1, we provide an overview of deep research from a three-dimensional perspective. The 

x-axis presents the basic stages of research, from search to review and then to research. With the introduction of LLMs, these stages have also been associated with new AI related terms such as “deep” and “agent”. The y-axis represents the motivations for research, including the presence of problems, questions, new findings, and hypotheses, as well as the goals, such as providing solutions, answers, validation, and applications. The z-axis reflects a gradual progression of experimental settings for re-search, from the internet digital environment (IDE) to simulation experimental environment (SEE) and finally to the real experimental environment (REE). 

Definition 1 (Deep Research ). Centered on LLM-based AI and using tools to interact with the exter-nal environment in a multimodal and interactive manner with feedback, deep research assists hu-mans in discovering and solving problems at differ-ent levels of automation, with the goal of reaching or even surpassing the level of top human scientists. 

To clearly delineate the boundaries of deep re-search, we distinguish it from adjacent terminolo-gies as follows: • Differentiating from Search/RAG: Search con-stitutes a key step within deep research. • Differentiating from Research: The addition of “deep” in deep research implies that the research process becomes more automated, more efficient, and more intelligent. • Differentiating from Deep Re-view/Survey/Summarization: Review constitutes a key step within deep research. • Differentiating from AI4S / AI for Science: Similar to “AI assistant”, AI4S emphasizes the use of AI as a tool to support scientific research in various domains. • Differentiating from Vibe Research: Vibe re-search can be regarded as a stage of deep re-search. It involves partial automation, but it still requires human intervention. • Differentiating from AI Scientist: AI Scien-tist is closely related to deep research, but in industry, deep research places greater em-phasis on the development of next-generation information processing engines endowed with research capabilities. 

4 Foundation: From Transformer to Agent 

4.1 Machine Learning 

AI is a system and a goal. Machine learning (ML) (Mitchell, 1997) is an effective approach to realize AI. Generative AI (GenAI) is an effective route to AI. A generative algorithm is a kind of ML algorithm. From an application standpoint, ML is typically categorized into classification, regression, and clustering. Based on research methodology, the field is further mainly divided into statistical machine learning, deep neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015; Goodfellow et al., 2016), reinforce-ment learning (RL), and evolutionary computation. Based on their approaches to modeling probability distributions, models are also classified as gener-ative or discriminative. According to the use of labeled data, learning is categorized as supervised or unsupervised. Prior to the recent boom in GenAI, ML involved significantly smaller datasets, com-pute clusters, and model sizes. 

4.2 Gemini of Generative AI 

As illustrated in Figure 2, we regard LLMs ( Pollux )and Stable Diffusion ( Castor ) as the Gemini of GenAI. 

4.2.1 Pollux : LLM 

The time from the adoption of deep neural net-work for natural language processing (NLP) to the emergence of LLMs is actually only about ten years. Word2Vec introduced efficient neu-ral methods to learn dense distributed word rep-resentations that capture semantic and syntactic relationships (Mikolov et al., 2013a,b). Better subword tokenization techniques like BPE (Sen-nrich et al., 2016; Kudo, 2018), WordPiece and SentencePiece, further help to reduce vocabulary size and handle rare words by encoding text into subword units (tokens). Subsequently, the Trans-former model was proposed (Vaswani et al., 2017). Transformers work because they use self-attention 3(c) Multimodal Generative Model      

> Transformer-based Architecture
> Image Encoder Audio Encoder Video Encoder Text Image Audio Video Other Modalities Image Input Projection Audio Input Projection Video Input Projection
> …
> Image Output Projection Audio Output Projection Video Output Projection Image Diffusion Audio Diffusion Video Diffusion
> …

(a) LLM - " Next-token prediction " 

> Layer Norm
> Multi-Head Attention
> FFN
> Layer Norm
> Imput Embedding
> Output Embedding
> Tokens Tokenizer
> Using
> aTransformer network is simple in …… Input
> using
> atransform ##er network is simple in ……
> 152
> 13
> 52
> 76
> 254
> 720
> 8
> 17
> Tokens
> 13
> 52
> 76
> 254
> 720
> 8
> 17
> Tokenizer
> atransform ##er network is simple in
> theory
> ……
> ……
> 123
> ……
> ×L
> βstar (Pollux )

(b) Stable Diffusion - " Denoising by noise estimation at each time step "    

> Diffusion Process
> Latent Space
> x̃ QK V
> QK V
> Denoising U-Net
> ∈θ
> 𝑥
> Pixel Space
> Semantic Map
> Text Images
> Representations
> Conditioning
> ε
> 𝒟 𝓏 𝓏 𝓏 T-1
> 𝓏 T
> 𝓏 T
> ×(T-1)

τθ

> α star (Castor )
> Agent Runtime
> Tools\Functions\Skills

(d) AI Agent 

> LLM-based Model
> Profile, goals & instructions
> Memory
> Reasoning/Planning Orchestration
> Critique

Figure 2: The Gemini of generative AI. 

to dynamically weigh the importance of different words in a sequence, enabling parallel process-ing and capturing long-range dependencies more effectively than recurrent or convolutional mod-els. Following this, different architectures based on the Transformer demonstrated superior perfor-mance on NLP tasks. These included the decoder-only GPT-1 (Radford et al., 2018), the encoder-only BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), and the encoder-decoder T5 (Raffel et al., 2020). OpenAI continued to refine the decoder-only models (see Figure 2(a)) and published GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). Note that GPT-3 ush-ered in the era of prompt engineering. In 2022, OpenAI released ChatGPT based on GPT-3.5. This system marked the first human-like conversation and attracted widespread public attention. In the next year, Meta’s open-weight model Llama 2 ac-celerated the trend of LLMs moving from “close” to “open” (Touvron et al., 2023). Later, more ef-fective positional embedding approaches were pro-posed to integrate the positional information among tokens (Su et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024a; Liu et al., 2025e), LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) and RL (Sti-ennon et al., 2020; Weng et al., 2022) were used to fine-tune LLMs. It can be argued that LLMs are a success of brute force in computation. They demon-strate that larger models, more data, and stronger computational resources can lead to a qualitative improvement in neural network performance. This established the foundation for the later idea sum-marized as “scaling law” (Kaplan et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2026), “intelligence emerging” (Wei et al., 2022a), “grokking” (Power et al., 2022), “LLM is intelligence compression” (Deletang et al., 2024), or “Aha moment”. Above all, next-token predic-tion (NTP) in the pretraining is the core and foun-dational training paradigm for autoregressive lan-guage modeling, its training objective can be for-mulated as follows: 

L(θ) = −

T −1X

t=1 

log Pθ(xt+1 | x1, x 2, . . . , x t) (1) 

Pθ(xt+1 | x1: t) is the probability assigned by the model (parameterized by θ) to the true next token 

xt+1 , given the context x1: t. The sum runs from 

t = 1 to T − 1, since there is no “next token” after the final token. 44.2.2 Castor : Stable Diffusion 

A diffusion probabilistic model is a parameterized Markov chain trained using variational inference to produce samples matching the data after finite time (Ho et al., 2020). The forward process (diffu-sion/noising) gradually adds Gaussian noise to an image over many steps until it becomes pure noise, while the reverse process (denoising/generation) in-volves a neural network (U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015)) learning to predict and subtract that noise step-by-step, allowing it to generate new, realistic data from random noise by reversing the corruption. The U-Net learns to reverse the noising, taking a noisy image and a timestep, and predicting the noise component to subtract, effectively moving from xt to xt−1. Stable Diffusion (SD) (Rombach et al., 2022) performs these processes not on pixel data, but in a compressed “latent space” using an autoencoder. This makes the process much faster and less computationally intensive than applying diffusion directly to high-resolution images. More-over, by introducing cross-attention layers into the model architecture, SD turns diffusion models into powerful and flexible generators for general condi-tioning inputs (see Figure 2(b)). In the same year, Stability AI and Midjourney released their image generation products and sparked a wave of mass participation in image creation. The corresponding objective can be simplified as follows: 

LSD := EE(x), y, ϵ ∼N (0 ,1) , t 

h

∥ϵ − ϵθ(zt, t, τ θ(y)) ∥22

i

(2) The noise is drawn from a standard normal dis-tribution ϵ ∼ N (0 , 1) , the encoder E encodes an image x into a latent representation z, the encoder 

τθ projects the condition y to an intermediate repre-sentation τθ(y)) , the denoising U-Net ϵθ estimates the noise at each time step. Later, the Transformer replaced U-Net (Peebles and Xie, 2023), and Rec-tified flow (Esser et al., 2024), a new generative model formula for finding a transport map between two empirically observed distributions by learn-ing an ordinary differential equation, demonstrated superior performance compared to the diffusion for-mulations. Thus flow and diffusion architectures based on the Transformer became the dominant approach for image generation (Ma et al., 2024b). Concurrently, ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023b) and InstantID (Wang et al., 2024c) were proposed to provide finer grained control over image generation using conditional inputs, and AnimateDiff (Guo et al., 2024) were developed to generate temporally consistent images, enabling video synthesis. 

4.3 Multimodal Generative Model 

As shown in Figure 2(c), multimodal generative models aim to integrate autoregressive language models and diffusion/flow models into a single framework, thereby extending model capabilities from a single modality to multiple modalities (Chen et al., 2024a). One approach is to unify under-standing and generation across multiple modalities within the same NTP used by LLMs (Wu et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2025e; Wang et al., 2026c), an-other approach cascades external diffusion models after the output of an MLLM to generate visual and audio modalities (Wang et al., 2024e; Ge et al., 2025), and a third approach combines next-token prediciton with mask token prediction (Xie et al., 2025) or rectified flow (Ma et al., 2025) in one single LLM that can handle different modalities in distinct ways. The exploration of multimodal generative models is still in its early research stage. The leading products right now are Google’s Nano Banana and Bytedance’s Seedance2.0. 

4.4 Agent 

“Token is cheap, show me your agent.” —This paper The term “agent” is not new. In earlier work, it typically referred to humans (Jiang et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). After the emergence of ChatGPT, it has attracted renewed attention. Its meaning has also shifted from referring to humans to refer-ring to AI. With the discovery of “Test-time Scal-ing” (Wang et al., 2023b; Lightman et al., 2023) and advances in interaction methods and reason-ing capabilities of LLMs (Wei et al., 2022b; Yao et al., 2023a,b; OpenAI et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025), researchers have begun integrating LLMs as the cognitive core into existing agents, while also equipping LLMs with tools, memory, and feed-back (Nakano et al., 2022; Schick et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023). Real-time and factual infor-mation from tools can help mitigate the halluci-nation issue and transcend the NTP paradigm in LLMs. LLMs are static, stateless, and passive, whereas agents are dynamic, stateful, and proac-tive. After pretraining, fine-tuning, or prompt engineering, an LLM can generate tokens that specify tool invocation. The interaction between an agent and an LLM typically carries out the 5Year GPU Framework Application Model Hardware Software 

2007 G80, Tesla C870 CUDA Theano 2012 GTX 580 AlexNet 2013 Caffe Word2Vec 2014 GTX 980, 1080 cuDNN GAN 2015 Keras, Tensorflow ResNet 2016 Tesla P100 Double/single-precision, HBM2, NVLink TensorRT PyTorch, MXNet AlphaGo 2017 Tesla V100 Mixed-precision training (FP16), Tensor Cores Transformer 2018 BERT, GPT-1 2019 Megatron-LM GPT-2 2020 A100 TF32, BF16, 40/80GB HBM, Sparse Computing DeepSpeed GPT-3 2022 H100 FP8, Transformer Engine, DPX Triton ChatGPT (GPT-3.5), Stable Diffusion 

> Table 1: The GPU-driven golden decade of AI development from 2012 to 2022.

“Thought →Action →Observation” loop. First, a user submits a query and the agent calls the LLM to obtain an initial token sequence. Second, if the agent detects that the output requires a tool call, it executes the tool, obtains the result, concate-nates the result with the context, and calls the LLM again. Third, the agent repeats these steps until a termination condition is met, and then returns the answer to the user. The core modules of an agent are typically shown in Figure 2(d). Different agents feature distinct orchestration structures and interact with the LLM through different processes. Notable open-source agent frameworks include LangChain ,

AutoGPT , LlamaIndex , AutoGen , MetaGPT , Open-Claw , and CrewAI , and popular applications mainly include the coding agent Cursor , the search agent 

Perplexity , and deep research agents introduced in this paper. 

4.5 GPU 

As shown in Table 1, the development of AI has relied heavily on advances in NVIDIA’s GPUs and their associated software infrastructure. The intro-duction of CUDA in 2007 enabled GPU computing power to be used not only for graphics rendering but also for general-purpose computation. In the same year, Theano laid the groundwork for modern deep learning frameworks. However, it was the AlexNet work using only two GTX 580 GPUs in 2012 that truly established GPUs as essential hard-ware for deep learning, triggering what is often called the “Cambrian explosion” of AI. This paper refers to the period from 2012, when AlexNet was published, to 2022, when ChatGPT was released, as the golden decade of AI. During this time, GPUs evolved rapidly. CUDA core counts continued to increase. Memory capacity grew larger, and mem-ory bandwidth became higher. As a result, two key metrics, compute density (FLOPs) and inter-connect bandwidth, improved significantly. The application domain of GPUs expanded from con-sumer gaming to AI data centers. Concurrently, deep learning frameworks matured, giving rise to two dominant platforms: TensorFlow and PyTorch. Among the GPU generations, the NVIDIA A100 made large-scale distributed training of large mod-els practically feasible. ChatGPT can be regarded as a product of GPT-3.5 trained on A100/V100 GPUs with PyTorch. Leading LLMs today are typically trained on GPU clusters with more than 

10,000 GPUs. 

5 AI Perspective 

“Train AI for the real world, not just for the leaderboard.” — This paper This section investigates deep research from an AI perspective, focusing on why and how AI de-6User System MasterAgent SubAgent1 SubAgent2 Memory ReviewAgent 

User System MasterAgent SubAgent1 SubAgent2 Memory ReviewAgent            

> Query Create master
> research agent
> Intent confirmation
> Intent supplement
> Think (intent determination)
> Persist results
> Return results
> Checks on temporal consistency, authority, relevance, hallucination, fact, and format, etc.
> Save intent
> Intent supplement
> Think (plan approach)
> Save plan
> Retrieve context
> Create SubAgent1
> for subtask 1
> Create SubAgent2 for subtask 2
> Inner search, offline search, online search, tool use
> Think (evaluate)
> Inner search, offline search, online search, tool use
> Think (evaluate)
> Complete subtask 2
> Complete subtask 1
> Think (synthesize results) Iterative research process More research needed?

×

✓

> Exit loop Continue loop
> Complete task
> Intent confirmation Iterative intent confirmation More information?

×

✓

> Exit loop Continue loop
> Save results

Figure 3: Iterative deep research. 

velopers design and build such agents based on LLMs. The motivation of DR is to automate com-plex, multi-step research by using LLMs to plan, search the web, analyze hundreds of sources, and synthesize information into detailed, cited reports, drastically cutting down research time from days to minutes for tasks like market analysis and legal reviews. It goes beyond simple Q&A by tackling in-tricate queries that require reasoning and gathering data from vast online sources, providing actionable insights and plans. 

5.1 Benchmark 

A benchmark is typically built on one or more datasets. It defines evaluation rubrics, metrics, parameters, and procedures to assess and rank agent performance. Benchmarks can be either public or internally proprietary. The datasets used in the public benchmarks may be fully public, have hidden test sets, or be entirely private. Agent performance on these benchmarks can guide ver-sion iteration, regression testing, and deployment decisions. Common public benchmarks for deep research agents include GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023), GPQA (Rein et al., 2024), FRAMES (Krishna 7DR Agent Backbone Logo Open or Closed Capabilities ENV Autonomy Search Review Research 

Gemini Gemini Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩★★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

ChatGPT GPT Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩★★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Claude Claude Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩★★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Grok Grok Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Kimi Kimi Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Doubao Seed Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

MiniMax MiniMax Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Ernie Ernie Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

StepFun Step Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Qwen Qwen Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩★★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

DeepSeek DeepSeek Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

GLM GLM Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

Perplexity DeepSeek Closed ✓ ✓ ✩✩★★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

MiroThinker Qwen Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

SciMaster DeepSeek Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

DeerFlow Model-agnostic Open ✓ ✓ ✩✩✩★★ IDE ◦ ◦ • • • 

> Table 2: Pioneering deep research agents (proprietary closed, proprietary open, external base) from the AI perspective. The five levels of automation correspond to L1-L5 in Figure 5. Note that the performance of these agents varies over time. AI4S researchers may also consider conducting studies based on open-weight models such as Llama 3 (Grattafiori et al., 2024), MiMO (Xiaomi et al., 2026), Mistral (Liu et al., 2026a), and LongCat (Meituan et al., 2026).

et al., 2025), BrowseComp (Wei et al., 2025a; Zhou et al., 2025c), WebWalkerQA (Wu et al., 2025c), DeepConsult, DeepResearchGym (Coelho et al., 2025), xbench-DeepSearch (Chen et al., 2025c), DeepResearch Bench (Du et al., 2026), Scholar-QABench (Asai et al., 2026), and Humanity’s Last Exam (Phan et al., 2026). Newly proposed public benchmarks that still require validation include SuperCLUE (Xu et al., 2023), WebAg-gregatorQA (Wang et al., 2025c), Mind2Web 2 (Gou et al., 2025), MLR-Bench (Chen et al., 2025b), ArXivBench (Li et al., 2025e), Paper-Bench (Starace et al., 2025), ResearchBench (Liu et al., 2025d), ResearcherBench (Xu et al., 2025a), DeepScholar-Bench (Patel et al., 2025), ResearchRubrics (Sharma et al., 2025), Report-Bench (Li et al., 2025d), AcademicBrowse (Zhou et al., 2025b), AstaBench (Bragg et al., 2026), LiveDRBench (Java et al., 2026), LiveSearch-Bench (Zhou et al., 2025a), ExpertLong-Bench (Ruan et al., 2026), DeepResearch Arena (Wan et al., 2025a), SPOT (Son et al., 2025), DatasetResearch (Li et al., 2025b), Rigorous-Bench (Yao et al., 2025), DRBench (Abaskohi et al., 2026), DeepShop (Lyu et al., 2025), FINDER (Zhang et al., 2025a), PHYBench (Qiu et al., 2025), ScienceAgentBench (Chen et al., 2025g), MicroVQA (Burgess et al., 2025), PDR-Bench (Liang et al., 2026), LiveRe-searchBench (Wang et al., 2026b), LiveNews-Bench (Zhang et al., 2026b), SealQA (Pham et al., 2026), DR-Arena (Gao et al., 2026a), DeepSearchQA (Gupta et al., 2026), P2P (Sun et al., 2026), and DeepResearch Bench II (Li et al., 2026b). These cover domains such as finance, science, policy, and engineering. Research questions are typically provided in the form of text, images, audio, videos, or PDF documents. Most benchmarks supply standard answers, though a few rely on expert human evaluation. 

5.2 Architecture 

Inspired by Anthropic’s Claude Research Agent and informed by published papers and open-source projects, the architecture of a deep research agent is generally as shown in Figure 3. When a user 8submits a query, the system first confirms user in-tents through a simple interactive procedure, and then creates a MasterAgent that enters an itera-tive research process. The MasterAgent begins by thinking through the approach and saving its plan to Memory to persist the context. It then cre-ates specialized SubAgents with specific research tasks. Each SubAgent independently performs searches, evaluates tool results using interleaved thinking, and returns findings to the MasterAgent. The MasterAgent synthesizes these results and de-cides whether more research is needed. Once suf-ficient information is gathered, the system exits the research loop and passes all findings to a Re-viewAgent, which ensures all claims are properly attributed to their sources. The final research re-sults, complete with citations, are then returned to the user. 

5.3 Pioneering Agents 

Pioneering deep research agents from AI perspec-tive that provide users with accessible links are listed in Table 2. We can see that, 1) Backbone large models, after agentic training, all gain the ability to perform tool-augmented deep research; 2) These agents consistently demonstrate search and review capabilities, but their research capa-bility remains comparatively weak, leaving a substantial gap between current systems and the vision of AI4S ; 3) Open-weight agents lag behind closed source systems in deep research performance, although the disparity is not signif-icant; 4) DR agents built on open-weight models can outperform their backbones; 5) Current stud-ies evaluate these agents primarily in IDE rather than in REE or SEE; 6) In terms of automation, DR systems are generally at level three. In addi-tion, other notable open-source DR projects include GPT Researcher, langchain “open_deep_research” and “local-deep-researcher”, node-DeepResearch, “Open Deep Research”, deep-research, OpenDeep-Researcher, OpenResearcher, FARS, autoresearch, DeerFlow, and WebThinker (Li et al., 2025h). 

5.4 Key Aspects Datasets & Benchmarks As shown in Sec-tion 5.1, many datasets and benchmarks have not yet been widely adopted. General DR agents can be trained on a broader range of high quality datasets to improve the generalizability of their research ca-pability and intelligence. Domain researchers can develop dedicated datasets for their fields and then build their own DR agents on either open-weight or proprietary foundation models. 

Tools ToolkenGPT represented each tool as a to-ken and learned an embedding for it, enabling tool calls in the same way as generating a regular word token (Hao et al., 2023). SciMaster utilized a tool-augmented reasoning agent designed to emulate human researchers by interacting flexibly with ex-ternal tools during its reasoning process (Chai et al., 2025). AutoTools was a framework that enables LLMs to act as automated tool learners, automat-ing the tool-use workflow (Shi et al., 2025b). Wu proposed an agentic reasoning framework by inte-grating mind-map, search, and code tools (Wu et al., 2025d). WebDancer provides the agent with search and click tools (Wu et al., 2025b). FlashRAG is an efficient and modular open-source toolkit designed to assist researchers (Jin et al., 2025a). TTE enables agents to synthesize, verify, and evolve executable tools during inference for scientific reasoning (Lu et al., 2026b). FutureTools and SciencePedia pro-vide tools for science in multiple fields. 

Agent Framework ResearStudio is a human-intervenable framework for building controllable DR Agents (Yang and Weng, 2025). SFR-DeepResearch was a native single-agent featur-ing minimal web crawling and Python tool inte-gration (Nguyen et al., 2025). SciAgent opera-tionalized scientific problem solving under a hi-erarchical Coordinator–Worker–Subagents frame-work (Li et al., 2025i). DeepResearcher imple-mented a multi-agent architecture where browsing agents extract relevant information from various webpage structures (Zheng et al., 2025b). TTD-DR conceptualized research report generation as a dif-fusion process (Han et al., 2025a). FlowSearch was a multi-agent framework that actively con-structs and evolves a dynamic structured knowl-edge flow to drive subtask execution and reason-ing (Hu et al., 2025b). MARS was a multi-agent system that seamlessly integrates System 1’s fast, intuitive thinking with System 2’s deliberate reason-ing (Chen et al., 2025a). MiroFlow was a three-tier hierarchical agent framework for general deep re-search tasks (MiroMind, 2025). WebWeaver was a dual-agent framework with a planner and a writer for open-ended deep research (Li et al., 2026d). WebWatcher combined vision-language reasoning and multi-tool interaction (Geng et al., 2026). O-Researcher was an open ended DR model via multi-agent distillation and agentic RL (Yao et al., 2026). 9Vision-DeepResearch performed multi-turn, multi-entity and multiscale visual and textual search to robustly hit real-world search engines under heavy noise (Huang et al., 2026). FS-Researcher was a file-system-based and dual-agent framework that scales deep research beyond the context window via a persistent workspace (Zhu et al., 2026). 

Agentic Learning Atom-Searcher provided atomic thought rewards for fine-grained guidance to address conflicting gradients and reward sparsity in RL learning (Deng et al., 2025). DeepDive designed a redundancy penalty that discourages repeated similar queries in multi-turn RL (Lu et al., 2025b). Hong designed M-GRPO RL training methods for vertical multi-agent DR systems (Hong et al., 2025). DeepPlanner trained the DR agent by GRPO with advantage shaping to scale its planning capability (Fan et al., 2025). DR Tulu used RL with evolving rubrics for learning in long-form tasks (Shao et al., 2025b). PokeeResearch-7B is trained by an annotation-free RLAIF framework to optimize policies using LLM-based reward signals that capture factual accuracy, citation faithfulness, and instruction adherence (Wan et al., 2025b). IterResearch introduced efficiency-aware rewards and adaptive downsampling into the RL learning framework (Chen et al., 2026). DeepSearch overcame the bottleneck of RL with verifiable rewards via Monte Carlo Tree Search (Wu et al., 2026). Search-R1++ was a strong DR agent adopting fast thinking templates and trained via REINFORCE with F1+ reward (Xu et al., 2026b). 

Context & Memory The enterprise Dingtalk-DeepResearch was able to evolve via an entropy-guided, memory-aware online learning mechanism, retrieving high-value prior cases from an episodic memory bank and exploring diverse historical con-texts (Chen et al., 2025d). WebResearcher (Qiao et al., 2025) and IterResearch (Chen et al., 2026) introduced a Markovian structure to build effec-tive context and memory. EvoFSM proposed a self-evolving mechanism for DR with finite state machines (Zhang et al., 2026a). K-Dense BYOK is a free, open-source AI co-scientist that runs on your desktop, powered by Claude Scientific Skills (K-Dense Inc., 2026). PantheonOS implemented an ex-tensible skill system encoding domain expertise as markdown templates with structured workflows for automatic genomics discovery (Xu et al., 2026a). 

6 AI4S Perspective 

“Training an AI system with a knowledge cutoff of 1911 and seeing if it could come up with general relativity like Einstein did in 1915.” —Demis Hassabis 

6.1 Related Summaries and Platforms 

Tom provided an overview of self-driving laborato-ries for chemistry and materials science (Tom et al., 2024). Gao and Wang found that the use of AI in re-search is widespread throughout the sciences, grow-ing especially rapidly since 2015 (Gao and Wang, 2024). Messeri and Crockett were concerned that the proliferation of AI tools in science risks in-troducing a phase of scientific enquiry in which we produce more but understand less (Messeri and Crockett, 2024). OpenAI and researchers presented a collection of short case studies in which GPT-5 produced new, concrete steps in ongoing research across mathematics, physics, astronomy, computer science, biology, and materials science (Bubeck et al., 2025). Si found that LLM-generated ideas are judged as more novel than human expert ideas while being judged slightly weaker on feasibil-ity (Si et al., 2025a,b). Ren provided a review of the architectures, design, benchmarks, applications, and ethical considerations surrounding LLM-based scientific agents (Ren et al., 2025). Wei offered a domain-oriented review of autonomous scientific discovery across life sciences, chemistry, materials, and physics (Wei et al., 2025b). Hu reviewed re-cent Sci-LLMs, from general-purpose foundations to specialized models across diverse scientific dis-ciplines, alongside an extensive analysis of training datasets (Hu et al., 2025a). Zheng provided a con-ceptual architecture and strategic foresight to nav-igate and shape the future of AI-driven scientific discovery (Zheng et al., 2025a). Trehan and Chopra reported lessons from four autonomous research attempts using LLMs (Trehan and Chopra, 2026). Hao stated that AI tools expand scientists’ impact but contract science’s focus (Hao et al., 2026). At present, the accessible AI4S platforms in-clude FutureHouse, Edison, ResearchRabbit, SciS-pace, scite_, Sider, Elicit, Autoscience, Deep Prin-ciple, hypogenic.ai, and Intern-Discovery. The open-source AI4S platforms include Research-Claw, autoresearch, Auto-claude-code-research-in-sleep, AutoResearchClaw, ScienceClaw, NanoRe-search, dr-claw, ASI-Evolve, and AI-Scientist (Lu et al., 2026a). 10 U1: Machine Learning as a Tool U2: Human-LLM Conversation                   

> U5: Agent Refinement
> U3: Prompt Engineering
> Input Output Machine Learning Models
> Question
> Prompt Template
> LLM Answer
> ?
> LLM Human
> What is deep research? How is it related AI for Science?
> …… (a) Pretraining (b) Supervised Fine-tuing (c) Preference Alignment
> Dataset
> Domain Document LLM Dataset
> Question
> LLM
> Answer
> Fine-tuned LLM
> Question Policy Model Observation
> Reward Reward Model
> Reference Model
> Action
> (i) Learning Time (ii) Runtime
> Environment Actor Gen Reward
> Reference Infer Reward Infer Critic Infer
> Actor Train Critic Train
> A2A
> A2A
> A2A
> Question
> Result
> Feedback
> Tool
> Memory MCP
> Thinking
> …
> U4: LLM Optimization

Figure 4: Five interaction paradigms in AI4S. 

6.2 Paradigm 

As shown in Figure 4, we categorize the interaction paradigms between researchers and AI in AI4S into five types. The fourth type, U 4, can be further divided into three subtypes, and the fifth type, U 5,into two subtypes. 

U1 : Machine Learning as a Tool Before Chat-GPT appeared, researchers commonly referred to AI precursors as machine learning algorithms. These algorithms were primarily used to process and model experimental data. Within this paradigm, machine learning functioned as a tool. 

U2 : Human-LLM Conversation After LLMs like ChatGPT gained acceptance, researchers began treating LLMs as more advanced search engines or smarter information processing systems. In this paradigm, researchers typically interact with these models through conversation. 

U3 : Prompt Engineering Compared with U 2,

U 3 involves more complex conversation. Re-searchers use prompt engineering to encourage LLMs to produce more effective responses. 

U4 : LLM Optimization In U 4, researchers build their own LLMs. They use methods such as pretraining (a), fine-tuning (b), and alignment pref-erence (c). These models may be based on open-weight LLMs or developed entirely from scratch. 

U5 : Agent Refinement The use of tools drives the transition from U 4 to U 5. Researchers can train models using agentic RL (i). Alternatively, they can build agents with LLMs that possess tool capabilities (ii). 

6.3 Fields 

For each field of scientific research, we first present the relevant datasets/benchmarks ( DBs )and T ools , then describe approaches following the paradigm in the order of U 1 → U 2 → U 3 →

U 4 → U 5. Note that if a study uses a Transformer model with a relatively small number of parameters, we classify it as U 1 rather than U 3.

6.3.1 Task-Agnostic & Multi-Task 

[DBs] : QASA benchmark consists of 1,798 novel question answering pairs that require full-stack reasoning on scientific articles in AI and ML fields (Lee et al., 2023). PIQA is a large-scale QA dataset specifically designed to interpret complex figures and tables within the context of scientific research articles across various domains of com-puter science (Pramanick et al., 2024). Multimodal ArXiv is a dataset for improving scientific com-prehension of large vision-language models (Li et al., 2024). SciEval is a multi-level LLM evalua-tion benchmark for scientific research (Sun et al., 2024). SciBench contains carefully curated dataset featuring a range of collegiate-level scientific prob-lems from mathematics, chemistry, and physics domains (Wang et al., 2024d). OlympiadBench is an Olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scien-tific benchmark, featuring 8,476 problems from Olympiad-level mathematics and physics compe-titions, including the Chinese college entrance exam (He et al., 2024). Song introduced a scenario grounded benchmark that evaluates LLMs across biology, chemistry, materials, and physics (Song et al., 2025) . Scientist-Bench is a comprehen-sive benchmark comprising state-of-the-art papers across diverse AI research domains (Tang et al., 2025). Liu introduced ATLAS benchmark, which is a cross-disciplinary evaluation suite composed of approximately 800 original problems (Liu et al., 2025b). LIMITGEN is a benchmark for evaluating LLMs’ capability to support early-stage feedback and complement human peer review (Xu et al., 2025b). ScienceAgentBench evaluated language agents for data-driven scientific discovery, extract-ing 102 tasks from 44 peer-reviewed publications in four disciplines (Chen et al., 2025g). SciArena is an open and collaborative platform for evalu-ating foundation models on scientific literature-grounded tasks (Zhao et al., 2025b). SCIVER is a benchmark designed to evaluate the ability of foundation models to verify claims within a multi-modal scientific context (Wang et al., 2025a). Hu-11 manity’s Last Exam is a multi-modal benchmark at the frontier of human knowledge, designed to be an expert-level closed-ended academic bench-mark with broad subject coverage (Phan et al., 2026). [Tools] : SciToolAgent leveraged a scien-tific tool knowledge graph across biology, chem-istry, and materials science that enables intelli-gent tool selection and execution through graph-based RAG (Ding et al., 2025). [U3] : PersLEARN is a tool designed to facilitate the cultivation of scientific perspectives, starting from a basic seed idea and progressing to a well-articulated frame-work (Shi et al., 2023). [U4] : OpenResearcher was built based on RAG to integrate LLMs with up-to-date, domain-specific knowledge (Zheng et al., 2024c). GraphEval is a lightweight graph-based LLM framework for idea evaluation (Feng et al., 2025). Goel leveraged the vast corpus of existing research papers to train LLMs that generate better research plans (Goel et al., 2025). Intern-S1 is a scientific multimodal foundation model with 28 billion activated parameters and 241 billion total parameters (Bai et al., 2025). SciReasoner intro-duced a scientific language foundation model that bridges general-purpose large language modeling with the heterogeneous data and reasoning work-flows of the natural sciences (Wang et al., 2025d). TTT-Discover performed RL at test time, so the LLM can continue to train, but with experience specific to the test scientific problem (Yuksekgonul et al., 2026). Innovator-VL is a scientific MLLM designed to advance multimodal understanding and reasoning across diverse scientific domains while still maintaining excellent performance on general vision tasks (Wen et al., 2026). [U5] : Le proposed a multi-agent deep research MLLMs system for mul-timedia verification (Le et al., 2025). SciSciGPT is a multi-agent designed to serve as a research collab-orator for science of science researchers and practi-tioners (Shao et al., 2025a). aiXiv is a multi-agent ecosystem, which allows research proposals and papers to be submitted, reviewed, and iteratively re-fined by both human and AI scientists (Zhang et al., 2025c). VIRSCI organized a team of agents to col-laboratively generate, evaluate, and refine research ideas (Su et al., 2025). PiFlow is an information-theoretical multi-agent framework, treating auto-mated scientific discovery as a structured uncer-tainty reduction problem guided by principles (Pu et al., 2025). Denario is a multi-agent system de-signed to serve as a research assistant for scientific discovery (Villaescusa-Navarro et al., 2025). Kos-mos is a multi-agent AI scientist that automates data-driven discovery (Mitchener et al., 2025). AI co-scientist is a multi-agent system to help uncover new, original knowledge and formulate demonstra-bly novel research hypotheses and proposals (Got-tweis et al., 2025). Li proposed a multi-agent frame-work to decompress scientific reasoning and con-struct a verifiable long CoT knowledge base (Li et al., 2025j). SAGA is a bi-level agent to ac-celerate scientific discovery for antibiotic design, inorganic materials design, functional DNA se-quence design, and chemical process design (Du et al., 2025). InternAgent is a unified closed-loop multi-agent framework to conduct autonomous sci-entific research across various scientific research fields (InternAgent et al., 2025). AgentExpt is a framework for baseline and dataset recommenda-tion (Li et al., 2025k). Deep Ideation integrated LLMs with scientific networks to generate novel and scientifically grounded research ideas (Zhao et al., 2025a). AI-Researcher is a multi-agent or-chestrating literature review, idea generation, algo-rithm implementation, experimental validation, and paper writing (Tang et al., 2025). Chain of Ideas agent offered a promising and concise solution by organizing ideas into a chain structure, effectively mirroring the progressive development within a given research domain (Li et al., 2025c). URSA is a scientific agent ecosystem for accelerating re-search tasks, which consists of a set of modular agents and tools (Grosskopf et al., 2025). RDR is a generalizable pipeline capable of systematically analyzing AI, robotics and beyond: identifying emerging trends, uncovering cross-domain opportu-nities, and offering concrete starting points for new inquiry (Zou et al., 2025). DEPLOY-MASTER constructed reproducible runtime environments for 50,112 scientific tools, and each successful tool is validated by a minimal executable command and registered in SCIENCEPEDIA for search and reuse (Wang et al., 2026d). MARVEL is a locally deployable, open-source framework for domain-aware question answering and assisted scientific research (Mukund et al., 2026). EvoScientist is an evolving multi-agent AI scientist framework that continuously improves its research strategies through persistent memory and self-evolution (Lyu et al., 2026). AI Scientist used existing founda-tion models to perform ideation, literature search, experiment planning and implementation, result analysis, manuscript writing, and peer review to produce complete, new papers of machine learning 12 science (Lu et al., 2026a). 

6.3.2 Biology 

[U1] : AlphaFold used a Transformer-like neural network to predict the three-dimensional struc-ture that a protein will adopt based solely on its amino acid sequence (Jumper et al., 2021). Wang used deep learning approaches for scaffolding pro-tein functional sites without needing to prespec-ify the fold or secondary structure of the scaf-fold (Wang et al., 2022). AlphaMissense is an adaptation of AlphaFold fine-tuned on human and primate variant population frequency databases to predict missense variant pathogenicity (Cheng et al., 2023). CLEAN is a contrastive learning al-gorithm for enzyme annotation (Yu et al., 2023). Lutz used Monte Carlo tree search with RL to design protein architectures (Lutz et al., 2023). LinearDesign algorithm found an optimal mRNA design for the spike protein in just 11 minutes, and concurrently optimized stability and codon usage (Zhang et al., 2023a). RoseTTAFold was proposed to design protein structure and function, which used diffusion architecture to model pro-tein backbone geometry and sequence–structure relationships (Watson et al., 2023). Chroma is a diffusion model for proteins and protein complexes that can directly sample novel protein structures and sequences (Ingraham et al., 2023). NAErnie is an RNA-focused pretrained model built upon the transformer architecture (Wang et al., 2024a). Al-phaFold 3 is a diffusion-based architecture that is capable of predicting the joint structure of com-plexes including proteins, nucleic acids, small molecules, ions, and modified residues (Abramson et al., 2024). MxDNA is a framework developed to autonomously learn effective DNA tokenization strategies solely through gradient descent (Qiao et al., 2024). scGPT is a foundation model for single-cell biology, which is based on a generative pretrained transformer across a repository of over 33 million cells (Cui et al., 2024). GEMORNA is a transformer encoder-decoder capable of designing mRNA sequences with unprecedented translational capacity and durability (Zhang et al., 2025b). [U4] :Lin demonstrated direct inference of full atomic-level protein structure from primary sequence us-ing a LLM (Lin et al., 2023). scFoundation is a large pretrained model with 100 million parame-ters covering about 20,000 genes, pretrained on over 50 million human single-cell transcriptomic profiles (Hao et al., 2024). BiomedGPT is an open-source and lightweight vision–language founda-tion model for diverse biomedical tasks (Zhang et al., 2024). UniFMIR is a pre-trained foundation models for universal fluorescence microscopy im-age restoration (Ma et al., 2024a). scTranslator utilized an encoder-decoder Transformer-based ar-chitecture for translating single-cell transcriptome to proteome (Liu et al., 2025c). ESM3 is a mul-timodal generative language model that reasons over the sequence, structure, and function of pro-teins (Hayes et al., 2025). Omni-DNA is a fam-ily of models spanning 20M to 1.1B parameters that supports sequence understanding, long-context genomic reasoning, and natural language annota-tion (Li et al., 2025l). LucaOne is a pre-trained foundation model trained on nucleic acid and pro-tein sequences from 169,861 species (He et al., 2025). AlphaGenome used a U-Net-inspired back-bone with transformer blocks to analyze the regula-tory genome for predicting molecular functions and variant effects from DNA (Avsec et al., 2026). En-zymeCAGE is a catalytic-specific geometric foun-dation model trained on approximately 1.5 million structure-informed enzyme–reaction pairs span-ning over 3,000 species (Liu et al., 2026b). Evo is a biological foundation model trained on 9 trillion DNA base pairs from a highly curated genomic atlas spanning all domains of life (Nguyen et al., 2024; Merchant et al., 2025; Brixi et al., 2026). 

[U5] : Biomni integrated LLM reasoning with RAG and code-based execution to help scientists dra-matically enhance research productivity and gener-ate testable hypotheses (Huang et al., 2025a). K-Dense Analyst is a hierarchical multi-agent sys-tem that achieves autonomous bioinformatics anal-ysis through a dual-loop architecture (Li et al., 2025f). LabOS AI is a co-scientist for the biomed-ical domain that unites computational reasoning with physical experimentation through multimodal perception, self-evolving agents, and XR-enabled human-AI collaboration (Cong et al., 2025). Vir-tual Lab, an AI–human research collaboration multi-agent, was used to design nanobody binders to recent variants of SARS-CoV-2 (Swanson et al., 2025). ChatNT is a multimodal conversational agent to bridge the gap between biology founda-tion models and conversational agents (de Almeida et al., 2025). CellWhisperer established a user-friendly approach for exploring scRNA-seq data, driven by chat-based analysis with natural lan-guage (Schaefer et al., 2025). 13 6.3.3 Materials 

[U1] : Raccuglia used ML algorithms trained on reaction data to predict reaction outcomes for the crystallization of templated vanadium selen-ites (Raccuglia et al., 2016). Generative models were used for inverse molecular design in mat-ter engineering (Sanchez-Lengeling and Aspuru-Guzik, 2018). Tshitoyan captured latent knowledge from materials science literature through unsuper-vised word embeddings (Tshitoyan et al., 2019). Burger used a mobile robot to search for improved photocatalysts for hydrogen production from water with a batched Bayesian search algorithm (Burger et al., 2020). GNoME is graph neural networks for efficient discovery of inorganic materials (Mer-chant et al., 2023). A-Lab is an autonomous lab-oratory for the solid-state synthesis of inorganic powders with machine learning and active learn-ing (Szymanski et al., 2023). InvDesFlow-AL is an active learning-based diffusion model for de-signing target functional inorganic crystal materi-als across the periodic table (Han et al., 2025b). MatterGen is a diffusion-based generative model that generates stable, diverse inorganic materials across the periodic table and can be fine-tuned to-wards a wide range of downstream tasks for inverse materials design (Zeni et al., 2025). MatRIS lever-aged attention to model three-body interactions for quantum mechanism calculation in materials (Zhou et al., 2026). [U4] : CrystaLLM is an autoregres-sive LLM for the versatile generation of crystal structures (Antunes et al., 2024). [U5] : SciAgents is a multi-agent designed to autonomously gener-ate and refine research hypotheses by leveraging LLMs and a comprehensive ontological knowledge graph (Ghafarollahi and Buehler, 2024; Buehler, 2024). ChatMOF is an AI system for predicting and generating metal-organic frameworks using LLMs, tools, and evaluators (Kang and Kim, 2024). 

6.3.4 Healthcare 

[DBs] : MultiMedQA is a benchmark combining six existing medical question answering datasets spanning professional medicine, research and con-sumer queries, and HealthSearchQA, a new dataset of medical questions searched online (Singhal et al., 2023). OmniMedVQA is a comprehensive medical visual question answering (VQA) benchmark, in-cluding 12 different modalities and covering more than 20 distinct anatomical regions (Hu et al., 2024). GMAI-MMBench is a general medical benchmark with 284 datasets across 38 medical image modalities, 18 clinical-related tasks, 18 de-partments, and 4 perceptual granularities in a VQA format (Chen et al., 2024b). [U1] : Esteva demon-strated classification of skin lesions using a single CNN, trained end-to-end from images directly, us-ing only pixels and disease labels as inputs (Esteva et al., 2017). Barata utilized a RL model for AI-based decision support in skin cancer (Barata et al., 2023). Steyaert fused multimodal data for cancer biomarker discovery with deep learning (Steyaert et al., 2023). RadDiag is a transformer-based foundational model for large-scale long-tailed dis-ease diagnosis on radiology images (Zheng et al., 2024b). OISA is a post-training framework based on a pre-trained CLIP model for radiology report generation with self-generation, self-evaluation, self-alignment, and self-iteration (Xiao et al., 2025). MAOSS is multi-modal and transformer-based AI for opportunistic screening, staging and progres-sion risk stratification of steatotic liver disease (Gao et al., 2026b). [U2] : Bean conducted a randomized study testing the effects of using LLMs to support medical self-assessment, and highlights the chal-lenges of public deployments of LLMs for direct patient care (Bean et al., 2026). [U4] : Flan-PaLM and Med-PaLM are instruction-tuned variants of PaLM on clinical data (Singhal et al., 2023, 2025). GMAI is a foundation models proposed for gen-eralist medical artificial intelligence (Moor et al., 2023). Zhongjing is a Chinese medical LLaMA-based LLM for Chinese medicine (Yang et al., 2024). Delphi-2M is a GPT-based architecture to predict the rates of more than 1,000 diseases, con-ditional on each individual’s past disease history diseases (Shmatko et al., 2025). SlideChat is a large vision-language assistant for whole-slide pathology image understanding (Chen et al., 2025f). CSFM is a multimodal foundation model pretrained on data from 1.7 million individuals for cardiac health assessment across scenarios and devices (Gu et al., 2026). [U5] : PathChat is a vision-language gener-alist AI assistant for human pathology (Lu et al., 2024a). LLM-RDF is a chemical synthesis devel-opment platform powered by GPT-4, which com-prises six specialized LLM-based agents, includ-ing Literature Scouter, Experiment Designer, Hard-ware Executor, Spectrum Analyzer, Separation In-structor, and Result Interpreter (Ruan et al., 2024). AMIE is an LLM-based AI system optimized for diagnostic dialogue (Tu et al., 2025; McDuff et al., 2025). DeepRare is a multi-agent system with 40 specialized tools and up-to-date knowledge sources 14 for rare disease differential diagnosis decision sup-port (Zhao et al., 2026). 

6.3.5 Medicine 

[U1] : Similarity-based machine learning ap-proaches were used to predict new molecular tar-gets for known drugs (Keiser et al., 2009). Deep neural networks were used to predict molecules with antibacterial activity (Stokes et al., 2020). RosettaVS is a structure-based virtual screen method based on active learning to predict dock-ing poses and binding affinities for drug discov-ery (Zhou et al., 2024). DrugCLIP combined con-trastive learning and dense retrieval based on a transformer architecture to achieve rapid and ac-curate genome-wide virtual screening (Jia et al., 2026). [U4] : MMed-Llama 3 is an 8B multi-lingual language model for medicine (Qiu et al., 2024). InstructMol is a multi-modal LLM which effectively aligns molecular structures with natural language via an instruction-tuning approach (Cao et al., 2025b). [U5] : MolRL-MGPT used a RL al-gorithm with multiple GPT agents for drug molec-ular generation (Hu et al., 2023). 

6.3.6 Chemistry 

[DBs] : ChemBench is an automated framework for evaluating the chemical knowledge and rea-soning abilities of LLMs against the expertise of chemists (Mirza et al., 2025). [U1] : MCTS com-bined deep neural networks and symbolic rules to perform chemical synthesis planning (Segler et al., 2018). Reac-Discovery used ML models for process optimization and reactor geometry re-finement (Tinajero et al., 2025). [U4] : Chemma is a fully fine-tuned LLM with 1.28 million pairs of Q&A about reactions, as an assistant to accel-erate organic chemistry synthesis (Zhang et al., 2025f). ChemVLM is an open-source chemical MLLM, which is trained on a bilingual multimodal dataset including molecular structures, reactions, and chemistry examination questions (Li et al., 2025a). QFANG is a scientific reasoning model for organic synthesis procedure generation (Liu et al., 2025a). MOSAIC is a computational frame-work that fine-tunes the open-weight Llama 3.1-8B-instruct model into 2,498 specialized chemistry experts (Li et al., 2026a). [U5] : Coscientist is a system driven by GPT-4 that autonomously de-signs, plans, and performs complex chemical ex-periments with tools such as internet and docu-mentation search, code execution and experimental automation (Boiko et al., 2023). ChemCrow is a chemistry agent with 18 expert-designed tools de-signed to accomplish tasks across organic synthesis, drug discovery and materials design (M. Bran et al., 2024). 

6.3.7 Mathematics 

[DBs] : MATHVISTA is a benchmark designed to combine challenges from diverse mathematical and visual tasks (Lu et al., 2024b). [U1] : Davies demon-strated a method by which machine learning can aid mathematicians in discovering new conjectures and theorems (Davies et al., 2021). Alfarano trained sequence-to-sequence transformers to discover a Lyapunov function that ensures the global stabil-ity of a dynamical system (Alfarano et al., 2024). 

[U3] : DSP+ is an improved version of the Draft, Sketch, and Prove framework for advanced theo-rem proving using LLMs, featuring a fine-grained and integrated neurosymbolic enhancement (Cao et al., 2025a). [U4] : LLEMMA is an open language model for mathematics by pretraining Code Llama on Proof-Pile-2 (Azerbayev et al., 2024). POSEI-DON is a foundation model based on a multiscale operator transformer for learning the solution oper-ators of PDEs (Herde et al., 2024). Math-Shepherd is a process-oriented math verifier, which assigns a reward score to each step of the LLM’s outputs on math problems (Wang et al., 2024b). FunSearch is an evolutionary procedure based on pairing a pretrained LLM with a systematic evaluator for mathematical discoveries (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024). STP is a self-play LLM theorem prover with iterative conjecturing and proving (Dong and Ma, 2025). [U5] : AlphaGeometry is a neuro-symbolic system that uses a neural language model to prove theorems in Euclidean plane geometry by synthe-sizing millions of theorems and proofs across vary-ing complexity levels (Trinh et al., 2024). TORA is a series of novel tool-integrated reasoning agents that synergistically combines natural language ra-tionale with program-based tool-use for mathe-matical problem solving (Gou et al., 2024). Al-phaProof is an AI agent that learns to find formal proofs through RL by training on millions of auto-formalized problems (Hubert et al., 2025). AlphaE-volve is an LLM-based code-mutation agent that helps researchers make advances in complexity the-ory (Nagda et al., 2026). Aletheia is a math re-search agent that iteratively generates, verifies, and revises solutions end-to-end in natural language, leveraging a novel inference-time scaling law based 15 upon Gemini Deep Think (Feng et al., 2026a,b). 

6.3.8 Physics 

[DBs] : NewtonBench is a benchmark comprising 324 scientific law discovery tasks across 12 physics domains (Zheng et al., 2026). [U1] : Canabarro em-ployed both unsupervised and supervised machine learning to identify quantum phase transitions (Can-abarro et al., 2019). Wu investigated an “AI Physi-cis” learning agent for unsupervised learning (Wu and Tegmark, 2019). Seif used machine learning models to infer the direction of time’s arrow iden-tifies entropy production as the relevant physical quantity in its decision-making process (Seif et al., 2021). Degrave presented a paradigm for plasma magnetic confinement on tokamaks through deep RL in nuclear fusion (Degrave et al., 2022). TQS is a transformer-based model for quantum many-body problems (Zhang and Di Ventra, 2023). Rein-schmidt introduced RL to cold atom experiments and demonstrated a flexible and adaptive approach to control a magneto-optical trap (Reinschmidt et al., 2024). Belis used an unsupervised kernel machine and two clustering algorithms to detect quantum anomaly detection (Belis et al., 2024). Zhang also provided a technical and unified review of AI for quantum, atomistic, and continuum sys-tems (Zhang et al., 2025e). [U3] : Pan carried out the quantum many-body physics calculations using LLMs by multistep prompt templates (Pan et al., 2025). [U5] : SGA is a scientific generative agent in which LLMs act as knowledgeable and adapt-able reasoners to propose scientific solutions such as physics equations or molecular structures, while simulations serve as experimental platforms that provide observational feedback and optimize con-tinuous components like physical parameters (Ma et al., 2024c). AI-Newton is a concept-driven dis-covery workflow capable of autonomously deriving physical laws from raw data (Fang et al., 2025). 

6.3.9 Meteorology 

[U1] : Ham used a CNN model to produce skilful ENSO forecasts for lead times of up to one and a half years (Ham et al., 2019). GraphCast is a machine learning–based method trained from re-analysis data to learn skillful medium-range global weather forecasting (Lam et al., 2023). Pangu-Weather used a 3D transformer-based encoder-decoder model for fast and accurate global weather forecast (Bi et al., 2023). NeuralGCM is a differen-tiable hybrid atmospheric model that combines the strengths of traditional general circulation models with machine learning for weather forecasting and climate simulation (Kochkov et al., 2024). GenCast is a conditional diffusion model for probabilistic weather forecasting (Price et al., 2025). FuXi-CFD is a machine learning-based framework designed to generate detailed 3D near-surface wind fields at 30-meter horizontal resolution, using only coarse-resolution atmospheric inputs and high-resolution terrain information (Lin et al., 2026). 

6.4 Present and Perspective of AI4S 

“AI for Science is the new lens of dis-covery, much like cryo-electron micro-scopes for proteins, particle accelerators for physics, and telescopes for astronomy.” 

— This paper Current research demonstrates substantial progress for AI4S in fields such as biology, materials, health-care, medicine, chemistry, mathematics, physics, and meteorology. AI is also playing an increas-ing role in other fields such as robotics (Kauf-mann et al., 2023; Radosavovic et al., 2024; Haarnoja et al., 2024; Lu et al., 2025a), neu-roscience (Bashivan et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2025), aerospace (Reichstein et al., 2019), agricul-ture (Ying et al., 2025), operations research (Wang et al., 2025e), nuclear reactions (Spears et al., 2025), geography (Brown et al., 2025), and fi-nance (Jin et al., 2025b). No single interaction paradigm is inherently superior to another. The choice of paradigm depends on the specific re-search problem. Even simple multi-turn dialogues (U2 ) can provide valuable assistance to scientists. However, several limitations persist. Automation levels remain insufficient for fully autonomous re-search. While agent-based paradigms enhance ef-ficiency, they often shift the manual burden rather than eliminating it, leaving scientists to perform the essential “scaffold work” for the agents. Fur-thermore, AI4S researchers often lack direct col-laboration with researchers of AI foundation mod-els. Although scientists frequently release datasets and benchmarks, it remains unclear whether these resources are directly applicable for training AI foundation models. Based on the degree of automation, as shown in Figure 5, we introduce a five-level taxonomy (L1-L5) to organize human-AI collaboration in AI4S. L1 is “Function-Level”, in which AI is invoked as a tool, and the human executes and closes the 16 L1: Function-Level - Auxiliary Tool L2: Task-Level - Task Execution L3: Collaborative-Level -Collaborative Autonomy L4: Guidance-Level - Expert Guidance L5: Autonomous-Level - Full Autonomy 

> AI is invoked as a tool; human executes and closes the loop. Human decomposes and assigns research tasks, AI executes the decomposed sub-tasks. AI executes the primary research task; human collaborates and supervises. AI provides expert-level services; human participates in key decisions. AI operates with full autonomy under human authorization, potentially exceeding human capabilities.
> Increasing AI Autonomy Decreasing Human Intervention

Figure 5: Human-AI collaboration in science. 

loop. L2 is “Task-Level”, in which human de-composes and assigns research tasks, AI executes the decomposed sub-tasks. L3 is “Collaborative-Level”, in which AI executes the primary research task, human collaborates and supervises. L4 is “Guidance-Level”, in which AI provides expert-level services, human participates in key decisions. L5 is “Autonomous-Level”, in which AI operates with full autonomy under human authorization, po-tentially exceeding human capabilities. It can be observed that most current research reaches at most L3 automation, with only a small fraction attaining L4. The current stage of AI4S can also be described as vibe research (Zhang, 2026). 

7 Discussion and Future Directions 

7.1 Key Challenges LLM and Harness The knowledge and reason-ing capacities of LLMs constitute the core basis of DR agents. However, LLMs can do some very complex things extremely well, yet fail at other tasks that seem simpler or closely related. “Jagged Intelligence” is a concept used to describe their uneven and unpredictable capabilities. Most rela-tive research focuses on improving a DR agent’s executive capability, while enhancing its LLM’s sci-entific taste remains largely underexplored (Tong et al., 2026a). In addition, the architecture of DR agents warrants further investigation. Harness is an agentic architecture that allows multiple agents to work with shared context across different sessions and context windows. Building reliable harnesses for DR sometimes matters more than the LLMs. 

Self-evolution The cost-effectiveness of pre-training is facing diminishing returns now. Ap-proaches like prompt engineering, context engi-neering, test-time scaling, SFT, and RL offer a limited performance ceiling for specific tasks. Con-sequently, current LLMs and agents lack the ca-pacity for robust life-long learning (Dupoux et al., 2026). Unlike these models and agents, humans can continually learn from the environment through observation, interaction and feedback. Therefore, DR agents must be capable of self-evolution af-ter deployment and able to learn autonomously or online within research environments. 

From IDE to REE A significant disparity exists between the research environments of human sci-entists and DR agents. Humans primarily conduct research in REE while utilizing IDE and SEE (see Figure 1). In contrast, DR agents operate mostly in the IDE and occasionally in the SEE. These environmental differences present three primary challenges. First, foundation models for DR must develop better perception and reasoning for physi-cal properties such as olfactory sensing and spatial cognition. Second, these agents require a broader set of tools to interact with REE. Third, DR agents need physical embodiment to move and perceive in the real world. This embodiment could be mani-fested as robotic systems or human proxies (Gemini et al., 2025). 

7.2 Promising Avenues 

“AI’s next scaling law is AI itself.” —This paper AI and AI4S are mutually reinforcing. Advances in AI can improve the quality and efficiency of scien-tific research (AI for Science). Progress in science can also advance AI (Science for AI). For example, DNNs were inspired by the human brain. Advances in physics and materials science can improve semi-conductor manufacturing and chip design. In the context of Science for AI, researchers shift from passive data collection to active generation. This approach provides specific data designed for model 17 training and structural reasoning. Data production thus prioritizes the needs of the model over the display of single experimental results. The emergence of ChatGPT and subsequent ad-vancements in LLMs suggest that AI has effectively passed the Turing Test (Turing, 2007). Current ef-forts in the field focus on reaching artificial general intelligence (AGI) (Hendrycks et al., 2025) or ar-tificial superintelligence (ASI or SI). Beyond DR agents, here we briefly introduce three promising directions for AGI. 

Agentic AI DR agents and coding agents (such as Cursor, Codex, OpenCode) are built for spe-cific research and programming tasks. General agents serve a broader purpose. They aim to exe-cute various tasks in unfamiliar settings. This ca-pability does not require extensive domain-specific engineering. At present, there are two primary pathways to achieve agentic AI. The first is to in-corporate agentic capabilities into LLMs, such as Claude-4, Gemini-3, GPT-5, and Kimi-2.5. The second is to build agent swarms on top of propri-etary or open-weight LLMs, such as OpenClaw and Manus. 

Embodied AI Embodied AI can be viewed as an advanced form of agentic AI. Its core compo-nents are “world model” and “embodied agent”. World models, such as Marble and Genie 3, can be regarded as a multimodal and multidimensional extension of LLMs (Hafner et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b; Tong et al., 2026b; Maes et al., 2026). Current world models typically use NTP for lan-guage and diffusion for vision, as shown in Fig-ure 2(c). Their training data go beyond text and include videos, image-text pairs, and even action-conditioned videos. The model evolutionary path is roughly “NTP (1D) →Diffusion (2D) →NeRF / Video Model (3D) →World Model (4D)”. The em-bodied agent extends agents from the IDE to the REE. It is often built on top of the world models. The agent can explore and interact in a physics-based simulation (SEE) (Bolton et al., 2025). It can also interact with the real world through live cameras and voice interfaces, smart glasses, au-tonomous cars, IP camera surveillance, or robots like Boston Atlas and Unitree robotics (Gemini et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026c). This allows the em-bodied agents to learn directly through continuous interaction. 

Neuromorphic Intelligence The term “Intelli-gence” is used rather than “AI” because biologi-cal brains play the primary role in this direction. There are two main branches of neuromorphic intel-ligence. One branch focuses on brain-mimetic mod-els (Maass, 1997) and hardware (Pei et al., 2019). These technologies derive intelligence from sim-ulating biological neural architectures. The other branch is “Cyborg Intelligence” (Yu et al., 2016; Yu, 2016). This approach uses brain-computer in-terfaces (BCIs) to establish direct communication between biological brains and machines. This inte-gration facilitates the fusion of biological and artifi-cial intelligence. Within this framework, machines may handle rapid System 1 tasks while biologi-cal brains manage deliberate System 2 decision-making. Their roles are also interchangeable de-pending on the context. 

8 Conclusions 

This paper first provides a definition of deep re-search. We differentiate this concept from re-lated terms for clarity. To help non-experts un-derstand the core of AI, we track the technical evolution of deep research from the Transformer to agents. We then analyze AI4S across multiple disci-plines. These include biology, materials, chemistry, medicine, mathematics, physics, meteorology, and other disciplines. The specific roles and impacts of AI in each field are clarified. AI can advance science, and science can in turn inform AI. Finally, this paper summarizes the core challenges facing deep research. We also propose three promising research directions for achieving AGI. 

Limitations 

Open-weight models and commercial closed-source LLMs are continuously and rapidly evolv-ing. Therefore, this paper reflects only the state of these models at the time of publication. The au-thors carefully reviewed all included papers. This applies to preprints from arXiv and bioRxiv as well. However, the authors primarily specialize in AI research. Consequently, the scope of the investi-gation into various AI for Science fields might be limited. 18 References 

Amirhossein Abaskohi, Tianyi Chen, Miguel Muñoz-Mármol, Curtis Fox, Amrutha Varshini Ramesh, Éti-enne Marcotte, Xing Han Lù, Nicolas Chapados, Spandana Gella, Christopher Pal, Alexandre Drouin, and Issam H. Laradji. 2026. DRBench: A realistic benchmark for enterprise deep research. In The Four-teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander Pritzel, Olaf Ron-neberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J. Ballard, Joshua Bambrick, Sebastian W. Bodenstein, David A. Evans, Chia-Chun Hung, Michael O’Neill, David Reiman, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Zachary Wu, Akvil ˙e Žemgulyt ˙e, Eirini Arvaniti, and 29 oth-ers. 2024. Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature ,630(8016):493–500. Alberto Alfarano, Francois Charton, and Amaury Hayat. 2024. Global lyapunov functions: a long-standing open problem in mathematics, with symbolic trans-formers. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Luis M Antunes, Keith T Butler, and Ricardo Grau-Crespo. 2024. Crystal structure generation with au-toregressive large language modeling. Nature Com-munications , 15(1):10570. Akari Asai, Jacqueline He, Rulin Shao, Weijia Shi, Amanpreet Singh, Joseph Chee Chang, Kyle Lo, Luca Soldaini, Sergey Feldman, Mike D’Arcy, David Wadden, Matt Latzke, Jenna Sparks, Jena D. Hwang, Varsha Kishore, Minyang Tian, Pan Ji, Shengyan Liu, Hao Tong, and 9 others. 2026. Synthesizing scientific literature with retrieval-augmented language models. 

Nature , 650(8103):857–863. Žiga Avsec, Natasha Latysheva, Jun Cheng, Guido No-vati, Kyle R. Taylor, Tom Ward, Clare Bycroft, Lau-ren Nicolaisen, Eirini Arvaniti, Joshua Pan, Raina Thomas, Vincent Dutordoir, Matteo Perino, So-ham De, Alexander Karollus, Adam Gayoso, Toby Sargeant, Anne Mottram, Lai Hong Wong, and 8 oth-ers. 2026. Advancing regulatory variant effect pre-diction with alphagenome. Nature , 649(8099):1206– 1218. Zhangir Azerbayev, Hailey Schoelkopf, Keiran Paster, Marco Dos Santos, Stephen Marcus McAleer, Al-bert Q. Jiang, Jia Deng, Stella Biderman, and Sean Welleck. 2024. Llemma: An open language model for mathematics. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Lei Bai, Zhongrui Cai, Yuhang Cao, Maosong Cao, Weihan Cao, Chiyu Chen, Haojiong Chen, Kai Chen, Pengcheng Chen, Ying Chen, Yongkang Chen, Yu Cheng, Pei Chu, Tao Chu, Erfei Cui, Ganqu Cui, Long Cui, Ziyun Cui, Nianchen Deng, and 158 others. 2025. Intern-s1: A scientific multimodal foundation model. Preprint , arXiv:2508.15763. Catarina Barata, Veronica Rotemberg, Noel C. F. Codella, Philipp Tschandl, Christoph Rinner, Bengu Nisa Akay, Zoe Apalla, Giuseppe Argenziano, Allan Halpern, Aimilios Lallas, Caterina Longo, Josep Malvehy, Susana Puig, Cliff Rosendahl, H. Pe-ter Soyer, Iris Zalaudek, and Harald Kittler. 2023. A reinforcement learning model for ai-based decision support in skin cancer. Nature Medicine , 29(8):1941– 1946. Pouya Bashivan, Kohitij Kar, and James J. DiCarlo. 2019. Neural population control via deep image synthesis. Science , 364(6439):eaav9436. Andrew M. Bean, Rebecca Elizabeth Payne, Guy Par-sons, Hannah Rose Kirk, Juan Ciro, Rafael Mosquera-Gómez, Sara Hincapié M, Aruna S. Ekanayaka, Li-onel Tarassenko, Luc Rocher, and Adam Mahdi. 2026. Reliability of llms as medical assistants for the general public: a randomized preregistered study. 

Nature Medicine , 32(2):609–615. Vasilis Belis, Kinga Anna Wo´ zniak, Ema Puljak, Panagi-otis Barkoutsos, Günther Dissertori, Michele Grossi, Maurizio Pierini, Florentin Reiter, Ivano Tavernelli, and Sofia Vallecorsa. 2024. Quantum anomaly detec-tion in the latent space of proton collision events at the lhc. Communications Physics , 7(1):334. Kaifeng Bi, Lingxi Xie, Hengheng Zhang, Xin Chen, Xiaotao Gu, and Qi Tian. 2023. Accurate medium-range global weather forecasting with 3d neural net-works. Nature , 619(7970):533–538. Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. 2023. Autonomous chemical research with large language models. Nature , 624(7992):570– 578. Adrian Bolton, Alexander Lerchner, Alexandra Cordell, Alexandre Moufarek, Andrew Bolt, Andrew Lampinen, Anna Mitenkova, Arne Olav Hallingstad, Bojan Vujatovic, Bonnie Li, Cong Lu, Daan Wier-stra, Daniel P. Sawyer, Daniel Slater, David Reichert, Davide Vercelli, Demis Hassabis, Drew A. Hud-son, Duncan Williams, and 46 others. 2025. Sima 2: A generalist embodied agent for virtual worlds. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.04797. Jonathan Bragg, Mike D’Arcy, Nishant Balepur, Dan Bareket, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Sergey Feldman, Dany Haddad, Jena D. Hwang, Peter Jansen, Varsha Kishore, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Aakanksha Naik, Sigal Rahamimov, Kyle Richardson, Aman-preet Singh, Harshit Surana, Aryeh Tiktinsky, Rosni Vasu, Guy Wiener, and 20 others. 2026. Astabench: Rigorous benchmarking of AI agents with a scien-tific research suite. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Garyk Brixi, Matthew G. Durrant, Jerome Ku, Mohsen Naghipourfar, Michael Poli, Gwanggyu Sun, Greg Brockman, Daniel Chang, Alison Fanton, Gabriel A. Gonzalez, Samuel H. King, David B. Li, Aditi T. Merchant, Eric Nguyen, Chiara Ricci-Tam, David W. 

19 Romero, Jonathan C. Schmok, Ali Taghibakhshi, An-ton Vorontsov, and 43 others. 2026. Genome mod-elling and design across all domains of life with evo 2. Nature .Christopher F. Brown, Michal R. Kazmierski, Valerie J. Pasquarella, William J. Rucklidge, Masha Samsikova, Chenhui Zhang, Evan Shelhamer, Estefania Lahera, Olivia Wiles, Simon Ilyushchenko, Noel Gorelick, Lihui Lydia Zhang, Sophia Alj, Emily Schechter, Sean Askay, Oliver Guinan, Rebecca Moore, Alexis Boukouvalas, and Pushmeet Kohli. 2025. Alphaearth foundations: An embedding field model for accurate and efficient global mapping from sparse label data. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.22291. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, and 1 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901. Sébastien Bubeck, Christian Coester, Ronen Eldan, Tim-othy Gowers, Yin Tat Lee, Alexandru Lupsasca, Mehtaab Sawhney, Robert Scherrer, Mark Sellke, Brian K. Spears, Derya Unutmaz, Kevin Weil, Steven Yin, and Nikita Zhivotovskiy. 2025. Early sci-ence acceleration experiments with gpt-5. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.16072. Markus J. Buehler. 2024. Accelerating scientific dis-covery with generative knowledge extraction, graph-based representation, and multimodal intelligent graph reasoning. Machine Learning: Science and Technology .Benjamin Burger, Phillip M. Maffettone, Vladimir V. Gusev, Catherine M. Aitchison, Yang Bai, Xiaoyan Wang, Xiaobo Li, Ben M. Alston, Buyi Li, Rob Clowes, Nicola Rankin, Brandon Harris, Reiner Se-bastian Sprick, and Andrew I. Cooper. 2020. A mo-bile robotic chemist. Nature , 583(7815):237–241. James Burgess, Jeffrey J Nirschl, Laura Bravo-Sánchez, Alejandro Lozano, Sanket Rajan Gupte, Jesus G Galaz-Montoya, Yuhui Zhang, Yuchang Su, Disha Bhowmik, Zachary Coman, and 1 others. 2025. Mi-crovqa: A multimodal reasoning benchmark for microscopy-based scientific research. In Proceed-ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 19552–19564. Askery Canabarro, Felipe Fernandes Fanchini, An-dré Luiz Malvezzi, Rodrigo Pereira, and Rafael Chaves. 2019. Unveiling phase transitions with ma-chine learning. Phys. Rev. B , 100:045129. Chenrui Cao, Liangcheng Song, Zenan Li, Xinyi Le, Xian Zhang, Hui Xue, and Fan Yang. 2025a. Reviv-ing dsp for advanced theorem proving in the era of reasoning models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .He Cao, Zijing Liu, Xingyu Lu, Yuan Yao, and Yu Li. 2025b. InstructMol: Multi-modal integration for building a versatile and reliable molecular assistant in drug discovery. In Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 354–379. Jingyi Chai, Shuo Tang, Rui Ye, Yuwen Du, Xinyu Zhu, Mengcheng Zhou, Yanfeng Wang, Weinan E, Yuzhi Zhang, Linfeng Zhang, and Siheng Chen. 2025. Sci-master: Towards general-purpose scientific ai agents, part i. x-master as foundation: Can we lead on hu-manity’s last exam? Preprint , arXiv:2507.05241. Guoxin Chen, Zile Qiao, Xuanzhong Chen, Donglei Yu, Haotian Xu, Xin Zhao, Ruihua Song, Wenbiao Yin, Huifeng Yin, Liwen Zhang, Kuan Li, Minpeng Liao, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2026. Iterresearch: Rethinking long-horizon agents via markovian state reconstruction. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Guoxin Chen, Zile Qiao, Wenqing Wang, Donglei Yu, Xuanzhong Chen, Hao Sun, Minpeng Liao, Kai Fan, Yong Jiang, Penguin Xie, Wayne Xin Zhao, Ruihua Song, and Fei Huang. 2025a. Mars: Optimizing dual-system deep research via multi-agent reinforcement learning. Preprint , arXiv:2510.04935. Hong Chen, Xin Wang, Yuwei Zhou, Bin Huang, Yipeng Zhang, Wei Feng, Houlun Chen, Zeyang Zhang, Siao Tang, and Wenwu Zhu. 2024a. Multi-modal generative ai: Multi-modal llm, diffusion and beyond. ArXiv , abs/2409.14993. Hui Chen, Miao Xiong, Yujie Lu, Wei Han, Ailin Deng, Yufei He, Jiaying Wu, Yibo Li, Yue Liu, and Bryan Hooi. 2025b. MLR-bench: Evaluating AI agents on open-ended machine learning research. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Kaiyuan Chen, Yixin Ren, Yang Liu, Xiaobo Hu, Hao-tong Tian, Tianbao Xie, Fangfu Liu, Haoye Zhang, Hongzhang Liu, Yuan Gong, Chen Sun, Han Hou, Hui Yang, James Pan, Jianan Lou, Jiayi Mao, Jizheng Liu, Jinpeng Li, Kangyi Liu, and 14 others. 2025c. xbench: Tracking agents productivity scaling with profession-aligned real-world evaluations. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.13651. Mengyuan Chen, Chengjun Dai, Xinyang Dong, Chengzhe Feng, Kewei Fu, Jianshe Li, Zhihan Peng, Yongqi Tong, Junshao Zhang, and Hong Zhu. 2025d. Dingtalk deepresearch: A unified multi agent frame-work for adaptive intelligence in enterprise environ-ments. Preprint , arXiv:2510.24760. Pengcheng Chen, Jin Ye, Guoan Wang, Yanjun Li, Zhongying Deng, Wei Li, Tianbin Li, Haodong Duan, Ziyan Huang, Yanzhou Su, Benyou Wang, Shaoting Zhang, Bin Fu, Jianfei Cai, Bohan Zhuang, Eric J Seibel, Yu Qiao, and Junjun He. 2024b. Gmai-mmbench: a comprehensive multimodal evaluation 

20 benchmark towards general medical ai. In Proceed-ings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24. Xiaokang Chen, Zhiyu Wu, Xingchao Liu, Zizheng Pan, Wen Liu, Zhenda Xie, Xingkai Yu, and Chong Ruan. 2025e. Janus-pro: Unified multimodal understanding and generation with data and model scaling. Preprint ,arXiv:2501.17811. Ying Chen, Guoan Wang, Yuanfeng Ji, Yanjun Li, Jin Ye, Tianbin Li, Ming Hu, Rongshan Yu, Yu Qiao, and Junjun He. 2025f. Slidechat: A large vision-language assistant for whole-slide pathology image understand-ing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition Conference , pages 5134–5143. Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Botao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2025g. Scienceagentbench: Toward rigorous assessment of language agents for data-driven sci-entific discovery. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jun Cheng, Guido Novati, Joshua Pan, Clare Bycroft, Akvil ˙e Žemgulyt ˙e, Taylor Applebaum, Alexander Pritzel, Lai Hong Wong, Michal Zielinski, Tobias Sargeant, Rosalia G. Schneider, Andrew W. Senior, John Jumper, Demis Hassabis, Pushmeet Kohli, and Žiga Avsec. 2023. Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with alphamissense. Science ,381(6664):eadg7492. Marina Chugunova, Dietmar Harhoff, Katharina Hölzle, Verena Kaschub, Sonal Malagimani, Ulrike Morgalla, and Robert Rose. 2026. Who uses ai in research, and for what? large-scale survey evidence from germany. 

Research Policy , 55(2):105381. João Coelho, Jingjie Ning, Jingyuan He, Kangrui Mao, Abhijay Paladugu, Pranav Setlur, Jiahe Jin, Jamie Callan, João Magalhães, Bruno Martins, and Chenyan Xiong. 2025. Deepresearchgym: A free, transparent, and reproducible evaluation sandbox for deep research. Preprint , arXiv:2505.19253. Le Cong, Zaixi Zhang, Xiaotong Wang, Yin Di, Ruo-fan Jin, Michal Gerasimiuk, Yinkai Wang, Ravi K. Dinesh, David Smerkous, Alex Smerkous, Xuekun Wu, Shilong Liu, Peishan Li, Yi Zhu, Simran Serrao, Ning Zhao, Imran A. Mohammad, John B. Sunwoo, Joseph C. Wu, and Mengdi Wang. 2025. Labos: The ai-xr co-scientist that sees and works with humans. 

Preprint , arXiv:2510.14861. Haotian Cui, Chloe Wang, Hassaan Maan, Kuan Pang, Fengning Luo, Nan Duan, and Bo Wang. 2024. scgpt: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative ai. Nature methods ,21(8):1470–1480. Alex Davies, Petar Veliˇ ckovi´ c, Lars Buesing, Sam Blackwell, Daniel Zheng, Nenad Tomašev, Richard Tanburn, Peter Battaglia, Charles Blundell, András Juhász, Marc Lackenby, Geordie Williamson, Demis Hassabis, and Pushmeet Kohli. 2021. Advancing mathematics by guiding human intuition with ai. Na-ture , 600(7887):70–74. Bernardo P de Almeida, Guillaume Richard, Hugo Dalla-Torre, Christopher Blum, Lorenz Hexemer, Priyanka Pandey, Stefan Laurent, Chandana Rajesh, Marie Lopez, Alexandre Laterre, and 1 others. 2025. A multimodal conversational agent for dna, rna and protein tasks. Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1–14. Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan Tracey, Francesco Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de las Casas, Craig Donner, Leslie Fritz, Cris-tian Galperti, Andrea Huber, James Keeling, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jackie Kay, Antoine Merle, Jean-Marc Moret, and 12 others. 2022. Magnetic control of toka-mak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning. 

Nature , 602(7897):414–419. Gregoire Deletang, Anian Ruoss, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Elliot Catt, Tim Genewein, Christo-pher Mattern, Jordi Grau-Moya, Li Kevin Wenliang, Matthew Aitchison, Laurent Orseau, Marcus Hutter, and Joel Veness. 2024. Language modeling is com-pression. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yong Deng, Guoqing Wang, Zhenzhe Ying, Xiaofeng Wu, Jinzhen Lin, Wenwen Xiong, Yuqin Dai, Shuo Yang, Zhanwei Zhang, Qiwen Wang, Yang Qin, Yuan Wang, Quanxing Zha, Sunhao Dai, and Changhua Meng. 2025. Atom-searcher: Enhancing agentic deep research via fine-grained atomic thought reward. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.12800. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language under-standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 , pages 4171–4186. Keyan Ding, Jing Yu, Junjie Huang, Yuchen Yang, Qiang Zhang, and Huajun Chen. 2025. Scitoola-gent: a knowledge-graph-driven scientific agent for multitool integration. Nature Computational Science ,pages 1–11. Kefan Dong and Tengyu Ma. 2025. STP: Self-play LLM theorem provers with iterative conjecturing and proving. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning .Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Licheng Zhang, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2026. Deepresearch bench: A comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents. In The Fourteenth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .

21 Yuanqi Du, Botao Yu, Tianyu Liu, Tony Shen, Junwu Chen, Jan G. Rittig, Kunyang Sun, Yikun Zhang, Zhangde Song, Bo Zhou, Cassandra Masschelein, Yingze Wang, Haorui Wang, Haojun Jia, Chao Zhang, Hongyu Zhao, Martin Ester, Teresa Head-Gordon, Carla P. Gomes, and 4 others. 2025. Accelerating scientific discovery with autonomous goal-evolving agents. Preprint , arXiv:2512.21782. Emmanuel Dupoux, Yann LeCun, and Jitendra Malik. 2026. Why ai systems don’t learn and what to do about it: Lessons on autonomous learning from cog-nitive science. Preprint , arXiv:2603.15381. Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Do-minik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, and Robin Rombach. 2024. Scaling rectified flow transform-ers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceed-ings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. Andre Esteva, Brett Kuprel, Roberto A. Novoa, Justin Ko, Susan M. Swetter, Helen M. Blau, and Sebas-tian Thrun. 2017. Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks. Nature ,542(7639):115–118. Wei Fan, Wenlin Yao, Zheng Li, Feng Yao, Xin Liu, Liang Qiu, Qingyu Yin, Yangqiu Song, and Bing Yin. 2025. Deepplanner: Scaling planning capability for deep research agents via advantage shaping. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.12979. You-Le Fang, Dong-Shan Jian, Xiang Li, and Yan-Qing Ma. 2025. Ai-newton: A concept-driven physical law discovery system without prior physical knowledge. 

Preprint , arXiv:2504.01538. Tao Feng, Yihang Sun, and Jiaxuan You. 2025. Graphe-val: A lightweight graph-based LLM framework for idea evaluation. In The Thirteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Tony Feng, Junehyuk Jung, Sang hyun Kim, Carlo Pagano, Sergei Gukov, Chiang-Chiang Tsai, David Woodruff, Adel Javanmard, Aryan Mokhtari, Dawsen Hwang, Yuri Chervonyi, Jonathan N. Lee, Garrett Bingham, Trieu H. Trinh, Vahab Mirrokni, Quoc V. Le, and Thang Luong. 2026a. Aletheia tackles first-proof autonomously. Preprint , arXiv:2602.21201. Tony Feng, Trieu H. Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Dawsen Hwang, Yuri Chervonyi, Junehyuk Jung, Joonkyung Lee, Carlo Pagano, Sang hyun Kim, Federico Pasqualotto, Sergei Gukov, Jonathan N. Lee, Junsu Kim, Kaiying Hou, Golnaz Ghiasi, Yi Tay, YaGuang Li, Chenkai Kuang, Yuan Liu, and 9 others. 2026b. Towards autonomous mathematics research. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.10177. Jian Gao and Dashun Wang. 2024. Quantifying the use and potential benefits of artificial intelligence in scientific research. Nature Human Behaviour ,8(12):2281–2292. Shanghua Gao, Ada Fang, Yepeng Huang, Valentina Giunchiglia, Ayush Noori, Jonathan Richard Schwarz, Yasha Ektefaie, Jovana Kondic, and Marinka Zitnik. 2024. Empowering biomedical dis-covery with ai agents. Cell , 187(22):6125–6151. Yiwen Gao, Ruochen Zhao, Yang Deng, and Wenx-uan Zhang. 2026a. Dr-arena: an automated evalua-tion framework for deep research agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.10504. Yuan Gao, Chunli Li, Wanxing Chang, Bai Du, Xi-anghua Ye, Yee Hui Yeo, Yingda Xia, Heng Guo, Xiaoming Zhang, Wei Liu, Ruobing Bai, Beibei Li, Yang Hong, Jiawen Yao, Le Lu, Kai Cao, Ke Yan, Jun Chen, Jie Li, and 3 others. 2026b. Multi-modal ai for opportunistic screening, staging and progression risk stratification of steatotic liver disease. Nature Communications , 17(1):1562. Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Jinguo Zhu, Yixiao Ge, Kun Yi, Lin Song, Chen Li, Xiaohan Ding, and Ying Shan. 2025. Seed-x: Multimodal models with unified multi-granularity comprehension and generation. Preprint ,arXiv:2404.14396. Robotics Team Gemini, Saminda Abeyruwan, Joshua Ainslie, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Montserrat Gon-zalez Arenas, Travis Armstrong, Ashwin Balakr-ishna, Robert Baruch, Maria Bauza, Michiel Blokz-ijl, Steven Bohez, Konstantinos Bousmalis, Anthony Brohan, Thomas Buschmann, Arunkumar Byravan, Serkan Cabi, Ken Caluwaerts, Federico Casarini, Os-car Chang, and 99 others. 2025. Gemini robotics: Bringing ai into the physical world. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.20020. Xinyu Geng, Peng Xia, Zhen Zhang, Xinyu Wang, Qi-uchen Wang, Ruixue Ding, Chenxi Wang, Jialong Wu, Kuan Li, Yida Zhao, Huifeng Yin, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Huaxiu Yao, Yi R. Fung, and Jingren Zhou. 2026. Webwatcher: Breaking new frontiers of vision-language deep research agent. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Alireza Ghafarollahi and Markus J Buehler. 2024. Scia-gents: Automating scientific discovery through bioin-spired multi-agent intelligent graph reasoning. Ad-vanced Materials , page 2413523. Darío Gil and Kathryn A. Moler. 2025. Accelerating science with ai. Science , 390(6777):965–965. Shashwat Goel, Rishi Hazra, Dulhan Jayalath, Ti-mon Willi, Parag Jain, William F. Shen, Ilias Leon-tiadis, Francesco Barbieri, Yoram Bachrach, Jonas Geiping, and Chenxi Whitehouse. 2025. Train-ing ai co-scientists using rubric rewards. Preprint ,arXiv:2512.23707. Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. 2016. Deep Learning . MIT Press. Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom 

22 Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryu-taro Tanno, Khaled Saab, Dan Popovici, Jacob Blum, Fan Zhang, Katherine Chou, Avinatan Hassidim, Bu-rak Gokturk, Amin Vahdat, Pushmeet Kohli, and 15 others. 2025. Towards an ai co-scientist. Preprint ,arXiv:2502.18864. Boyu Gou, Zanming Huang, Yuting Ning, Yu Gu, Michael Lin, Botao Yu, Andrei Kopanev, Wei-jian Qi, Yiheng Shu, Jiaman Wu, Chan Hee Song, Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Hanane Nour Moussa, TIANSHU ZHANG, Jian Xie, Tianci Xue, Shijie Chen, and 7 others. 2025. Mind2web 2: Evaluating agentic search with agent-as-a-judge. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, yelong shen, Yujiu Yang, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. 2024. ToRA: A tool-integrated reasoning agent for mathematical problem solving. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schel-ten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mi-tra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, and 542 others. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. Preprint , arXiv:2407.21783. Michael Grosskopf, Russell Bent, Rahul Somasun-daram, Isaac Michaud, Arthur Lui, Nathan De-bardeleben, and Earl Lawrence. 2025. Ursa: The universal research and scientific agent. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.22653. Xiao Gu, Wei Tang, Jinpei Han, Veer Sangha, Fenglin Liu, Shreyank N Gowda, Antonio H Ribeiro, Patrick Schwab, Kim Branson, Lei Clifton, and 1 others. 2026. Cardiac health assessment across scenarios and devices using a multimodal foundation model pretrained on data from 1.7 million individuals. Na-ture Machine Intelligence , 8(2):220–233. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Zhu-oshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, and 175 others. 2025. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai. 2024. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning. International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Nikita Gupta, Riju Chatterjee, Lukas Haas, Connie Tao, Andrew Wang, Chang Liu, Hidekazu Oiwa, Elena Gribovskaya, Jan Ackermann, John Blitzer, Sasha Goldshtein, and Dipanjan Das. 2026. Deepsearchqa: Bridging the comprehensiveness gap for deep re-search agents. Preprint , arXiv:2601.20975. Tuomas Haarnoja, Ben Moran, Guy Lever, Sandy H. Huang, Dhruva Tirumala, Jan Humplik, Markus Wulfmeier, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Noah Y. Siegel, Roland Hafner, Michael Bloesch, Kristian Har-tikainen, Arunkumar Byravan, Leonard Hasenclever, Yuval Tassa, Fereshteh Sadeghi, Nathan Batchelor, Federico Casarini, Stefano Saliceti, and 9 others. 2024. Learning agile soccer skills for a bipedal robot with deep reinforcement learning. Science Robotics ,9(89):eadi8022. Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timo-thy Lillicrap. 2025. Mastering diverse control tasks through world models. Nature , 640(8059):647–653. Yoo-Geun Ham, Jeong-Hwan Kim, and Jing-Jia Luo. 2019. Deep learning for multi-year enso forecasts. 

Nature , 573(7775):568–572. Rujun Han, Yanfei Chen, Zoey CuiZhu, Lesly Miculi-cich, Guan Sun, Yuanjun Bi, Weiming Wen, Hui Wan, Chunfeng Wen, Solène Maître, George Lee, Vishy Tirumalashetty, Emily Xue, Zizhao Zhang, Salem Haykal, Burak Gokturk, Tomas Pfister, and Chen-Yu Lee. 2025a. Deep researcher with test-time diffusion. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.16075. Xiao-Qi Han, Peng-Jie Guo, Ze-Feng Gao, Hao Sun, and Zhong-Yi Lu. 2025b. Invdesflow-al: active learning-based workflow for inverse design of func-tional materials. npj Computational Materials .Minsheng Hao, Jing Gong, Xin Zeng, Chiming Liu, Yucheng Guo, Xingyi Cheng, Taifeng Wang, Jianzhu Ma, Xuegong Zhang, and Le Song. 2024. Large-scale foundation model on single-cell transcriptomics. 

Nature methods , 21(8):1481–1491. Qianyue Hao, Fengli Xu, Yong Li, and James Evans. 2026. Artificial intelligence tools expand scientists’ impact but contract science’s focus. Nature .Shibo Hao, Tianyang Liu, Zhen Wang, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. ToolkenGPT: Augmenting frozen language models with massive tools via tool embeddings. In 

Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Thomas Hayes, Roshan Rao, Halil Akin, Nicholas J Sofroniew, Deniz Oktay, Zeming Lin, Robert Verkuil, Vincent Q Tran, Jonathan Deaton, Marius Wig-gert, and 1 others. 2025. Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model. Science ,387(6736):850–858. Chaoqun He, Renjie Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Shengding Hu, Zhen Thai, Junhao Shen, Jinyi Hu, Xu Han, Yujie Huang, Yuxiang Zhang, Jie Liu, Lei Qi, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2024. OlympiadBench: A challenging benchmark for promoting AGI with 

23 olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific prob-lems. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3828–3850. Yong He, Pan Fang, Yongtao Shan, Yuanfei Pan, Yan-hong Wei, Yichang Chen, Yihao Chen, Yi Liu, Zhenyu Zeng, Zhan Zhou, and 1 others. 2025. Gen-eralized biological foundation model with unified nucleic acid and protein language. Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1–12. Dan Hendrycks, Dawn Song, Christian Szegedy, Honglak Lee, Yarin Gal, Erik Brynjolfsson, Sharon Li, Andy Zou, Lionel Levine, Bo Han, Jie Fu, Ziwei Liu, Jinwoo Shin, Kimin Lee, Mantas Mazeika, Long Phan, George Ingebretsen, Adam Khoja, Cihang Xie, and 14 others. 2025. A definition of agi. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.18212. Maximilian Herde, Bogdan Raoni´ c, Tobias Rohner, Roger Käppeli, Roberto Molinaro, Emmanuel de Bézenac, and Siddhartha Mishra. 2024. Poseidon: efficient foundation models for pdes. In Proceed-ings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. De-noising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceed-ings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20. Haoyang Hong, Jiajun Yin, Yuan Wang, Jingnan Liu, Zhe Chen, Ailing Yu, Ji Li, Zhiling Ye, Hansong Xiao, Yefei Chen, Hualei Zhou, Yun Yue, Minghui Yang, Chunxiao Guo, Junwei Liu, Peng Wei, and Jinjie Gu. 2025. Multi-agent deep research: Train-ing multi-agent systems with m-grpo. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.13288. Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Ming Hu, Chenglong Ma, Wei Li, Wanghan Xu, Jiamin Wu, Jucheng Hu, Tianbin Li, Guohang Zhuang, Ji-aqi Liu, Yingzhou Lu, Ying Chen, Chaoyang Zhang, Cheng Tan, Jie Ying, Guocheng Wu, Shujian Gao, Pengcheng Chen, Jiashi Lin, Haitao Wu, and 84 oth-ers. 2025a. A survey of scientific large language models: From data foundations to agent frontiers. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.21148. Xiuyuan Hu, Guoqing Liu, Yang Zhao, and Hao Zhang. 2023. De novo drug design using reinforcement learning with multiple gpt agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 7405–7418. Yusong Hu, Runmin Ma, Yue Fan, Jinxin Shi, Zong-sheng Cao, Yuhao Zhou, Jiakang Yuan, Xiangchao Yan, Wenlong Zhang, Lei Bai, and Bo Zhang. 2025b. Flowsearch: Advancing deep research with dynamic structured knowledge flow. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.08521. Yutao Hu, Tianbin Li, Quanfeng Lu, Wenqi Shao, Jun-jun He, Yu Qiao, and Ping Luo. 2024. Omnimed-vqa: A new large-scale comprehensive evaluation benchmark for medical lvlm. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , pages 22170–22183. Kexin Huang, Serena Zhang, Hanchen Wang, Yuanhao Qu, Yingzhou Lu, Yusuf Roohani, Ryan Li, Lin Qiu, Junze Zhang, Yin Di, and 1 others. 2025a. Biomni: A general-purpose biomedical ai agent. bioRxiv , pages 2025–05. Wenxuan Huang, Yu Zeng, Qiuchen Wang, Zhen Fang, Shaosheng Cao, Zheng Chu, Qingyu Yin, Shuang Chen, Zhenfei Yin, Lin Chen, Zehui Chen, Yao Hu, Philip Torr, Feng Zhao, and Wanli Ouyang. 2026. Vision-deepresearch: Incentivizing deepre-search capability in multimodal large language mod-els. Preprint , arXiv:2601.22060. Yuxuan Huang, Yihang Chen, Haozheng Zhang, Kang Li, Meng Fang, Linyi Yang, Xiaoguang Li, Lifeng Shang, Songcen Xu, Jianye Hao, Kun Shao, and Jun Wang. 2025b. Deep research agents: Asystematic examination and roadmap. Preprint ,arXiv:2506.18096. Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Mik-lós Z. Horváth, Goran Žuži´ c, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, Ottavia Bertolli, Tom Zahavy, Amol Mand-hane, Jessica Yung, Iuliya Beloshapka, Borja Ibarz, Vivek Veeriah, Lei Yu, Oliver Nash, and 20 others. 2025. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reason-ing with reinforcement learning. Nature .John B. Ingraham, Max Baranov, Zak Costello, Karl W. Barber, Wujie Wang, Ahmed Ismail, Vincent Frap-pier, Dana M. Lord, Christopher Ng-Thow-Hing, Erik R. Van Vlack, Shan Tie, Vincent Xue, Sarah C. Cowles, Alan Leung, João V. Rodrigues, Claudio L. Morales-Perez, Alex M. Ayoub, Robin Green, Kather-ine Puentes, and 7 others. 2023. Illuminating protein space with a programmable generative model. Na-ture , 623(7989):1070–1078. Team InternAgent, Bo Zhang, Shiyang Feng, Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan, Runmin Ma, Yusong Hu, Zhiyin Yu, Xiaohan He, Songtao Huang, Shaowei Hou, Zheng Nie, Zhilong Wang, Jinyao Liu, Tianshuo Peng, Peng Ye, Dongzhan Zhou, Shufei Zhang, Xi-aosong Wang, and 7 others. 2025. Internagent: When agent becomes the scientist – building closed-loop system from hypothesis to verification. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.16938. Abhinav Java, Ashmit Khandelwal, Sukruta Prakash Midigeshi, Aaron Halfaker, Amit Deshpande, Navin Goyal, Ankur Gupta, Nagarajan Natarajan, and Amit Sharma. 2026. Characterizing deep research: Abenchmark and formal definition. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .

24 Yinjun Jia, Bowen Gao, Jiaxin Tan, Jiqing Zheng, Xin Hong, Wenyu Zhu, Haichuan Tan, Yuan Xiao, Liping Tan, Hongyi Cai, Yanwen Huang, Zhiheng Deng, Xi-angwei Wu, Yue Jin, Yafei Yuan, Jiekang Tian, Wei He, Weiying Ma, Yaqin Zhang, and 4 others. 2026. Deep contrastive learning enables genome-wide vir-tual screening. Science , 391(6781):eads9530. Zhuoxuan Jiang, Jie Ma, Jingyi Lu, Guangyuan Yu, Yipeng Yu, and Shaochun Li. 2019. A general planning-based framework for goal-driven conver-sation assistant. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 33(01):9857–9858. Jiajie Jin, Yutao Zhu, Zhicheng Dou, Guanting Dong, Xinyu Yang, Chenghao Zhang, Tong Zhao, Zhao Yang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025a. Flashrag: A modular toolkit for efficient retrieval-augmented generation research. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 , WWW ’25, page 737–740. Song Jin, Shuqi Li, Shukun Zhang, and Rui Yan. 2025b. Finrpt: Dataset, evaluation system and llm-based multi-agent framework for equity research report gen-eration. Preprint , arXiv:2511.07322. Haocheng Ju and Bin Dong. 2026. Ai for mathemat-ics: Progress, challenges, and prospects. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.13209. John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, Alex Bridgland, Clemens Meyer, Simon A. A. Kohl, Andrew J. Ballard, Andrew Cowie, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, and 15 others. 2021. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with al-phafold. Nature , 596(7873):583–589. K-Dense Inc. 2026. Claude scientific skills: Acomprehensive collection of scientific tools for claude ai. https://github.com/K-Dense-AI/ claude-scientific-skills .Yeonghun Kang and Jihan Kim. 2024. Chatmof: an artificial intelligence system for predicting and gener-ating metal-organic frameworks using large language models. Nature communications , 15(1):4705. Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling laws for neural language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2001.08361. Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquer-cio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and Davide Scaramuzza. 2023. Champion-level drone rac-ing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature ,620(7976):982–987. Michael J. Keiser, Vincent Setola, John J. Irwin, Chris-tian Laggner, Atheir I. Abbas, Sandra J. Hufeisen, Niels H. Jensen, Michael B. Kuijer, Roberto C. Matos, Thuy B. Tran, Ryan Whaley, Richard A. Glen-non, Jérôme Hert, Kelan L. H. Thomas, Douglas D. Edwards, Brian K. Shoichet, and Bryan L. Roth. 2009. Predicting new molecular targets for known drugs. Nature , 462(7270):175–181. Dmitrii Kochkov, Janni Yuval, Ian Langmore, Peter Nor-gaard, Jamie Smith, Griffin Mooers, Milan Klöwer, James Lottes, Stephan Rasp, Peter Düben, Sam Hatfield, Peter Battaglia, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Willson, Michael P. Brenner, and Stephan Hoyer. 2024. Neural general circulation models for weather and climate. Nature , 632(8027):1060–1066. Satyapriya Krishna, Kalpesh Krishna, Anhad Mo-hananey, Steven Schwarcz, Adam Stambler, Shyam Upadhyay, and Manaal Faruqui. 2025. Fact, fetch, and reason: A unified evaluation of retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 4745–4759. Taku Kudo. 2018. Subword regularization: Improv-ing neural network translation models with multiple subword candidates. In Proceedings of the 56th An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 66–75. Remi Lam, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Matthew Will-son, Peter Wirnsberger, Meire Fortunato, Ferran Alet, Suman Ravuri, Timo Ewalds, Zach Eaton-Rosen, Weihua Hu, Alexander Merose, Stephan Hoyer, George Holland, Oriol Vinyals, Jack-lynn Stott, Alexander Pritzel, Shakir Mohamed, and Peter Battaglia. 2023. Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting. Science ,382(6677):1416–1421. Huy Hoan Le, Van Sy Thinh Nguyen, Thi Le Chi Dang, Vo Thanh Khang Nguyen, Truong Thanh Hung Nguyen, and Hung Cao. 2025. Multimedia verifica-tion through multi-agent deep research multimodal large language models. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia , MM ’25, page 14034–14040. Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Deep learning. Nature , 521(7553):436–444. Yoonjoo Lee, Kyungjae Lee, Sunghyun Park, Dasol Hwang, Jaehyeon Kim, Hong-in Lee, and Moontae Lee. 2023. Qasa: advanced question answering on scientific articles. In Proceedings of the 40th Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’23. Haote Li, Sumon Sarkar, Wenxin Lu, Patrick O. Lof-tus, Tianyin Qiu, Yu Shee, Abbigayle E. Cuomo, John-Paul Webster, H. Ray Kelly, Vidhyadhar Manee, Sanil Sreekumar, Frederic G. Buono, Robert H. Crab-tree, Timothy R. Newhouse, and Victor S. Batista. 2026a. Collective intelligence for ai-assisted chemi-cal synthesis. Nature .

25 Junxian Li, Di Zhang, Xunzhi Wang, Zeying Hao, Jingdi Lei, Qian Tan, Cai Zhou, Wei Liu, Yaotian Yang, Xinrui Xiong, Weiyun Wang, Zhe Chen, Wenhai Wang, Wei Li, Mao Su, Shufei Zhang, Wanli Ouyang, Yuqiang Li, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2025a. Chemvlm: Exploring the power of multimodal large language models in chemistry area. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 39(1):415–423. Keyu Li, Mohan Jiang, Dayuan Fu, Yunze Wu, Xiangkun Hu, Dequan Wang, and Pengfei Liu. 2025b. Datasetresearch: Benchmarking agent sys-tems for demand-driven dataset discovery. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.06960. Lei Li, Yuqi Wang, Runxin Xu, Peiyi Wang, Xiachong Feng, Lingpeng Kong, and Qi Liu. 2024. Multimodal ArXiv: A dataset for improving scientific comprehen-sion of large vision-language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 14369–14387. Long Li, Weiwen Xu, Jiayan Guo, Ruochen Zhao, Xingxuan Li, Yuqian Yuan, Boqiang Zhang, Yuming Jiang, Yifei Xin, Ronghao Dang, Yu Rong, Deli Zhao, Tian Feng, and Lidong Bing. 2025c. Chain of ideas: Revolutionizing research via novel idea development with LLM agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 8971–9004. Minghao Li, Ying Zeng, Zhihao Cheng, Cong Ma, and Kai Jia. 2025d. Reportbench: Evaluating deep re-search agents via academic survey tasks. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.15804. Ning Li, Jingran Zhang, and Justin Cui. 2025e. Arx-ivbench: Can llms assist researchers in conducting research? Preprint , arXiv:2504.10496. Orion Li, Vinayak Agarwal, Summer Zhou, Ashwin Gopinath, and Timothy Kassis. 2025f. K-dense an-alyst: Towards fully automated scientific analysis. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.07043. Ruizhe Li, Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2026b. Deepresearch bench ii: Diagnosing deep research agents via rubrics from expert report. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.08536. Wenjun Li, Zhi Chen, Jingru Lin, Hannan Cao, Wei Han, Sheng Liang, Zhi Zhang, Kuicai Dong, Dexun Li, Chen Zhang, and Yong Liu. 2025g. Reinforcement learning foundations for deep research systems: A survey. Preprint , arXiv:2509.06733. Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025h. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capability. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Xinghang Li, Peiyan Li, Long Qian, Minghuan Liu, Dong Wang, Jirong Liu, Bingyi Kang, Xiao Ma, Xin-long Wang, Di Guo, Tao Kong, Hanbo Zhang, and Huaping Liu. 2026c. What matters in building vision– language–action models for generalist robots. Nature Machine Intelligence , 8(2):158–172. Xuchen Li, Ruitao Wu, Xuanbo Liu, Xukai Wang, Jinbo Hu, Zhixin Bai, Bohan Zeng, Hao Liang, Leheng Chen, Mingrui Chen, Haitian Zhong, Xuanlin Yang, Xu-Yao Zhang, Liu Liu, Jia Li, Kaiqi Huang, Jiahao Xu, Haitao Mi, Wentao Zhang, and Bin Dong. 2025i. Sciagent: A unified multi-agent system for generalis-tic scientific reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2511.08151. Yu Li, Yuan Huang, Tao Wang, Caiyu Fan, Xiansheng Cai, Sihan Hu, Xinzijian Liu, Cheng Shi, Mingjun Xu, Zhen Wang, Yan Wang, Xiangqi Jin, Tianhan Zhang, Linfeng Zhang, Lei Wang, Youjin Deng, Pan Zhang, Weijie Sun, Xingyu Li, and 4 others. 2025j. Inverse knowledge search over verifiable rea-soning: Synthesizing a scientific encyclopedia from a long chains-of-thought knowledge base. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.26854. Yu Li, Lehui Li, Qingmin Liao, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2025k. Agentexpt: Automating ai experiment design with llm-based resource retrieval agent. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.04921. Zehui Li, Vallijah Subasri, Yifei Shen, Dongsheng Li, Wentao Gu, Guy-Bart Stan, Yiren Zhao, and Cai-hua Shan. 2025l. Omni-dna: A genomic model sup-porting sequence understanding, long-context, and textual annotation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Zijian Li, Xin Guan, Bo Zhang, Shen Huang, Houquan Zhou, Shaopeng Lai, Ming Yan, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jun Zhang, and Jingren Zhou. 2026d. Webweaver: Structuring web-scale evidence with dynamic outlines for open-ended deep research. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Yuan Liang, Jiaxian Li, Yuqing Wang, WANG PIAO-HONG, Motong Tian, Pai Liu, Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, He Zhu, Ge Zhang, Minghao Liu, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Ningyu Zhang, and Wangchunshu Zhou. 2026. Towards personalized deep research: Benchmarks and evaluations. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yura Burda, Harri Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. 2023. Let’s verify step by step. Preprint ,arXiv:2305.20050. Chensen Lin, Ruian Tie, Shihong Yi, Dongqing Liu, Xiaohui Zhong, Zixin Hu, and Hao Li. 2026. Re-constructing fine-scale 3d wind fields with terrain-informed machine learning. Nature Communica-tions .

26 Minhua Lin, Zongyu Wu, Zhichao Xu, Hui Liu, Xi-anfeng Tang, Qi He, Charu Aggarwal, Hui Liu, Xi-ang Zhang, and Suhang Wang. 2025. A comprehen-sive survey on reinforcement learning-based agentic search: Foundations, roles, optimizations, evalua-tions, and applications. Preprint , arXiv:2510.16724. Zeming Lin, Halil Akin, Roshan Rao, Brian Hie, Zhongkai Zhu, Wenting Lu, Nikita Smetanin, Robert Verkuil, Ori Kabeli, Yaniv Shmueli, and 1 others. 2023. Evolutionary-scale prediction of atomic-level protein structure with a language model. Science ,379(6637):1123–1130. Alexander H. Liu, Kartik Khandelwal, Sandeep Sub-ramanian, Victor Jouault, Abhinav Rastogi, Adrien Sadé, Alan Jeffares, Albert Jiang, Alexandre Cahill, Alexandre Gavaudan, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Amélie Héliou, Amos You, Andy Ehrenberg, Andy Lo, Anton Eliseev, Antonia Calvi, Avinash Soori-yarachchi, Baptiste Bout, and 101 others. 2026a. Ministral 3. Preprint , arXiv:2601.08584. Guoqing Liu, Junren Li, Zihan Zhao, Eray Inanc, Krzysztof Maziarz, Jose Garrido Torres, Victor Gar-cia Satorras, Shoko Ueda, Christopher M. Bishop, and Marwin Segler. 2025a. A scientific reasoning model for organic synthesis procedure generation. 

Preprint , arXiv:2512.13668. Hongwei Liu, Junnan Liu, Shudong Liu, Haodong Duan, Yuqiang Li, Mao Su, Xiaohong Liu, Guangtao Zhai, Xinyu Fang, Qianhong Ma, Taolin Zhang, Zihan Ma, Yufeng Zhao, Peiheng Zhou, Linchen Xiao, Wenlong Zhang, Shijie Zhou, Xingjian Ma, Siqi Sun, and 17 others. 2025b. Atlas: A high-difficulty, multidisci-plinary benchmark for frontier scientific reasoning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2511.14366. Linjing Liu, Wei Li, Fang Wang, Yiming Li, Long-Kai Huang, Ka-Chun Wong, Fan Yang, and Jianhua Yao. 2025c. A pre-trained large generative model for translating single-cell transcriptomes to proteomes. 

Nature Biomedical Engineering .Yong Liu, Chenqing Hua, Menglong Xu, Tao Zeng, Jiahua Rao, Zhongyue Zhang, Ruibo Wu, Jing-Ke Weng, Connor W Coley, and Shuangjia Zheng. 2026b. A geometric foundation model for enzyme retrieval with evolutionary insights. Nature Catalysis .Yujie Liu, Zonglin Yang, Tong Xie, Jinjie Ni, Ben Gao, Yuqiang Li, Shixiang Tang, Wanli Ouyang, Erik Cambria, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2025d. Research-bench: Benchmarking llms in scientific discovery via inspiration-based task decomposition. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.21248. Zikang Liu, Longteng Guo, Yepeng Tang, Tongtian Yue, Junxian Cai, Kai Ma, Qingbin Liu, Xi Chen, and Jing Liu. 2025e. VRoPE: Rotary position embedding for video large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Yutaro Ya-mada, Shengran Hu, Jakob Foerster, David Ha, and Jeff Clune. 2026a. Towards end-to-end automation of ai research. Nature , 651(8107):914–919. Jiaxuan Lu, Ziyu Kong, Yemin Wang, Rong Fu, Haiyuan Wan, Cheng Yang, Wenjie Lou, Haoran Sun, Lilong Wang, Yankai Jiang, Xiaosong Wang, Xiao Sun, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2026b. Beyond static tools: Test-time tool evolution for scientific reason-ing. Preprint , arXiv:2601.07641. Ming Y Lu, Bowen Chen, Drew FK Williamson, Richard J Chen, Melissa Zhao, Aaron K Chow, Kenji Ikemura, Ahrong Kim, Dimitra Pouli, Ankush Pa-tel, and 1 others. 2024a. A multimodal generative ai copilot for human pathology. Nature , 634(8033):466– 473. Pan Lu, Hritik Bansal, Tony Xia, Jiacheng Liu, Chun-yuan Li, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Hao Cheng, Kai-Wei Chang, Michel Galley, and Jianfeng Gao. 2024b. Mathvista: Evaluating mathematical reasoning of foundation models in visual contexts. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Renzhi Lu, Zonghe Shao, Yuemin Ding, Ruijuan Chen, Dongrui Wu, Housheng Su, Tao Yang, Fumin Zhang, Jun Wang, Yang Shi, Zhong-Ping Jiang, Han Ding, and Hai-Tao Zhang. 2025a. Discovery of the reward function for embodied reinforcement learning agents. 

Nature Communications , 16(1):11064. Rui Lu, Zhenyu Hou, Zihan Wang, Hanchen Zhang, Xiao Liu, Yujiang Li, Shi Feng, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. 2025b. Deepdive: Advancing deep search agents with knowledge graphs and multi-turn rl. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.10446. Xiaoliang Luo, Akilles Rechardt, Guangzhi Sun, Kevin K. Nejad, Felipe Yáñez, Bati Yilmaz, Kangjoo Lee, Alexandra O. Cohen, Valentina Borghesani, An-ton Pashkov, Daniele Marinazzo, Jonathan Nicholas, Alessandro Salatiello, Ilia Sucholutsky, Pasquale Minervini, Sepehr Razavi, Roberta Rocca, Elkhan Yusifov, Tereza Okalova, and 20 others. 2025. Large language models surpass human experts in predict-ing neuroscience results. Nature Human Behaviour ,9(2):305–315. Isaac D. Lutz, Shunzhi Wang, Christoffer Norn, Alexis Courbet, Andrew J. Borst, Yan Ting Zhao, Annie Dosey, Longxing Cao, Jinwei Xu, Elizabeth M. Leaf, Catherine Treichel, Patrisia Litvicov, Zhe Li, Alexan-der D. Goodson, Paula Rivera-Sánchez, Ana-Maria Bratovianu, Minkyung Baek, Neil P. King, Hannele Ruohola-Baker, and David Baker. 2023. Top-down design of protein architectures with reinforcement learning. Science , 380(6642):266–273. Yougang Lyu, Xi Zhang, Xinhao Yi, Yuyue Zhao, Shuyu Guo, Wenxiang Hu, Jan Piotrowski, Jakub Kaliski, Jacopo Urbani, Zaiqiao Meng, Lun Zhou, and Xiao-hui Yan. 2026. Evoscientist: Towards multi-agent 

27 evolving ai scientists for end-to-end scientific discov-ery. Preprint , arXiv:2603.08127. Yougang Lyu, Xiaoyu Zhang, Lingyong Yan, Maarten de Rijke, Zhaochun Ren, and Xiuying Chen. 2025. Deepshop: A benchmark for deep research shopping agents. Preprint , arXiv:2506.02839. Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Bal-dassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. 2024. Augmenting large language models with chem-istry tools. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6(5):525– 535. Chenxi Ma, Weimin Tan, Ruian He, and Bo Yan. 2024a. Pretraining a foundation model for generalizable flu-orescence microscopy-based image restoration. Na-ture Methods , 21(8):1558–1567. Nanye Ma, Mark Goldstein, Michael S Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, Eric Vanden-Eijnden, and Sain-ing Xie. 2024b. Sit: Exploring flow and diffusion-based generative models with scalable interpolant transformers. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 23–40. Pingchuan Ma, Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Minghao Guo, Zhiqing Sun, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Daniela Rus, Chuang Gan, and Wojciech Matusik. 2024c. LLM and simulation as bilevel optimizers: A new paradigm to advance physical scientific discovery. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Yiyang Ma, Xingchao Liu, Xiaokang Chen, Wen Liu, Chengyue Wu, Zhiyu Wu, Zizheng Pan, Zhenda Xie, Haowei Zhang, Xingkai Yu, and 1 others. 2025. Janusflow: Harmonizing autoregression and rectified flow for unified multimodal understanding and gen-eration. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 7739–7751. Wolfgang Maass. 1997. Networks of spiking neurons: the third generation of neural network models. Neu-ral Networks , 10(9):1659–1671. Lucas Maes, Quentin Le Lidec, Damien Scieur, Yann LeCun, and Randall Balestriero. 2026. Leworldmodel: Stable end-to-end joint-embedding predictive architecture from pixels. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.19312. Daniel McDuff, Mike Schaekermann, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Amy Wang, Jake Garrison, Karan Singhal, Yash Sharma, Shekoofeh Azizi, Kavita Kulkarni, Le Hou, Yong Cheng, Yun Liu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Sushant Prakash, Anupam Pathak, Christopher Sem-turs, Shwetak Patel, Dale R. Webster, and 9 others. 2025. Towards accurate differential diagnosis with large language models. Nature , 642(8067):451–457. LongCat Team Meituan, Anchun Gui, Bei Li, Bingyang Tao, Bole Zhou, Borun Chen, Chao Zhang, Chao Zhang, Chen Gao, Chen Zhang, Chengcheng Han, Chenhui Yang, Chuyu Zhang, Cong Chen, Cun-guang Wang, Daoru Pan, Defei Bu, Dengchang Zhao, Di Xiu, and 147 others. 2026. Longcat-flash-thinking-2601 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.16725. Aditi T Merchant, Samuel H King, Eric Nguyen, and Brian L Hie. 2025. Semantic design of functional de novo genes from a genomic language model. Nature .Amil Merchant, Simon Batzner, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Muratahan Aykol, Gowoon Cheon, and Ekin Dogus Cubuk. 2023. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery. Nature , 624(7990):80–85. Lisa Messeri and M. J. Crockett. 2024. Artificial intel-ligence and illusions of understanding in scientific research. Nature , 627(8002):49–58. Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Tomás Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013a. Efficient estimation of word representa-tions in vector space. In 1st International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013 .Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg Cor-rado, and Jeffrey Dean. 2013b. Distributed repre-sentations of words and phrases and their composi-tionality. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems - Volume 2 , NIPS’13, page 3111–3119. AI Team MiroMind. 2025. Miroflow: A high-performance open-source research agent framework. 

https://github.com/MiroMindAI/MiroFlow .Adrian Mirza, Nawaf Alampara, Sreekanth Kunchapu, Martiño Ríos-García, Benedict Emoekabu, Aswanth Krishnan, Tanya Gupta, Mara Schilling-Wilhelmi, Macjonathan Okereke, Anagha Aneesh, Mehrdad Asgari, Juliane Eberhardt, Amir Mohammad Elahi, Hani M. Elbeheiry, María Victoria Gil, Christina Glaubitz, Maximilian Greiner, Caroline T. Holick, Tim Hoffmann, and 16 others. 2025. A framework for evaluating the chemical knowledge and reason-ing abilities of large language models against the expertise of chemists. Nature Chemistry , 17(7):1027– 1034. T.M. Mitchell. 1997. Machine Learning . McGraw-Hill. Ludovico Mitchener, Angela Yiu, Benjamin Chang, Mathieu Bourdenx, Tyler Nadolski, Arvis Sulovari, Eric C. Landsness, Daniel L. Barabasi, Siddharth Narayanan, Nicky Evans, Shriya Reddy, Martha Foiani, Aizad Kamal, Leah P. Shriver, Fang Cao, As-mamaw T. Wassie, Jon M. Laurent, Edwin Melville-Green, Mayk Caldas, and 18 others. 2025. Kosmos: An ai scientist for autonomous discovery. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.02824. 

28 Fengran Mo, Kelong Mao, Ziliang Zhao, Hongjin Qian, Haonan Chen, Yiruo Cheng, Xiaoxi Li, Yutao Zhu, Zhicheng Dou, and Jian-Yun Nie. 2025. A survey of conversational search. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. , 43(6). Michael Moor, Oishi Banerjee, Zahra Shakeri Hossein Abad, Harlan M. Krumholz, Jure Leskovec, Eric J. Topol, and Pranav Rajpurkar. 2023. Foundation mod-els for generalist medical artificial intelligence. Na-ture , 616(7956):259–265. Nikhil Mukund, Yifang Luo, Fan Zhang, Lisa Barsotti, and Erik Katsavounidis. 2026. Marvel: A multi agent-based research validator and enabler using large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2601.03436. Ansh Nagda, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Abhradeep Thakurta. 2026. Reinforced generation of combinato-rial structures: Hardness of approximation. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.18057. Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. 2022. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback. 

Preprint , arXiv:2112.09332. Eric Nguyen, Michael Poli, Matthew G Durrant, Brian Kang, Dhruva Katrekar, David B Li, Liam J Bartie, Armin W Thomas, Samuel H King, Garyk Brixi, and 1 others. 2024. Sequence modeling and design from molecular to genome scale with evo. Science ,386(6723):eado9336. Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Shrey Pandit, Revanth Gangi Reddy, Austin Xu, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. 2025. Sfr-deepresearch: Towards ef-fective reinforcement learning for autonomously rea-soning single agents. Preprint , arXiv:2509.06283. Jasmine Chiat Ling Ong, Yilin Ning, Rui Yang, Danielle S. Bitterman, Xiaoxuan Liu, Yih Chung Tham, Gary S. Collins, Michelle María Jiménez de Tavárez, Bilal A. Mateen, Kwesi Nyan Amissah-Arthur, Bin Sheng, Iain Bee Huat Tan, Chuan Hong, Lionel Tim-Ee Cheng, Benjamin Alan Goldstein, Phuoc V. Le, Yun Liu, Hiang Khoon Tan, Marcus Eng Hock Ong, and 9 others. 2026. Large language models in global health. Nature Health , 1(1):35–47. OpenAI, Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, Alex Iftimie, Alex Karpenko, Alex Tachard Passos, Alexander Neitz, Alexander Prokofiev, Alexander Wei, Allison Tam, Ally Bennett, and 243 others. 2024. Openai o1 system card. Preprint , arXiv:2412.16720. Haining Pan, Nayantara Mudur, William Taranto, Maria Tikhanovskaya, Subhashini Venugopalan, Yasaman Bahri, Michael P. Brenner, and Eun-Ah Kim. 2025. Quantum many-body physics calculations with large language models. Communications Physics , 8(1):49. Liana Patel, Negar Arabzadeh, Harshit Gupta, Ankita Sundar, Ion Stoica, Matei Zaharia, and Carlos Guestrin. 2025. Deepscholar-bench: A live bench-mark and automated evaluation for generative re-search synthesis. Preprint , arXiv:2508.20033. William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable dif-fusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 4195–4205. Jing Pei, Lei Deng, Sen Song, Mingguo Zhao, Youhui Zhang, Shuang Wu, Guanrui Wang, Zhe Zou, Zhen-zhi Wu, Wei He, Feng Chen, Ning Deng, Si Wu, Yu Wang, Yujie Wu, Zheyu Yang, Cheng Ma, Guoqi Li, Wentao Han, and 5 others. 2019. Towards ar-tificial general intelligence with hybrid tianjic chip architecture. Nature , 572(7767):106–111. Thinh Pham, Nguyen Phan Nguyen, Pratibha Zunjare, Weiyuan Chen, Yu-Min Tseng, and Tu Vu. 2026. SealQA: Raising the bar for reasoning in search-augmented language models. In The Fourteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations .Long Phan, Alice Gatti, Nathaniel Li, Adam Khoja, Ryan Kim, Richard Ren, Jason Hausenloy, Oliver Zhang, Mantas Mazeika, Dan Hendrycks, Ziwen Han, Josephina Hu, Hugh Zhang, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Mohamed Shaaban, John Ling, Sean Shi, Michael Choi, Anish Agrawal, and 281 others. 2026. A bench-mark of expert-level academic questions to assess ai capabilities. Nature , 649(8099):1139–1146. Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. 2022. Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorith-mic datasets. Preprint , arXiv:2201.02177. Shraman Pramanick, Rama Chellappa, and Subhashini Venugopalan. 2024. SPIQA: A dataset for multi-modal question answering on scientific papers. In 

The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Ilan Price, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Ferran Alet, Tom R. Andersson, Andrew El-Kadi, Dominic Mas-ters, Timo Ewalds, Jacklynn Stott, Shakir Mohamed, Peter Battaglia, Remi Lam, and Matthew Willson. 2025. Probabilistic weather forecasting with ma-chine learning. Nature , 637(8044):84–90. Yingming Pu, Tao Lin, and Hongyu Chen. 2025. Piflow: Principle-aware scientific discovery with multi-agent collaboration. Preprint , arXiv:2505.15047. Lifeng Qiao, Peng Ye, Yuchen Ren, Weiqiang Bai, Chaoqi Liang, Xinzhu Ma, Nanqing Dong, and Wanli Ouyang. 2024. Model decides how to tokenize: adap-tive dna sequence tokenization with mxdna. In Pro-ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24. Zile Qiao, Guoxin Chen, Xuanzhong Chen, Donglei Yu, Wenbiao Yin, Xinyu Wang, Zhen Zhang, Baixuan Li, Huifeng Yin, Kuan Li, Rui Min, Minpeng Liao, 

29 Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Webresearcher: Unleashing unbounded reasoning capability in long-horizon agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.13309. Pengcheng Qiu, Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Weixiong Lin, Haicheng Wang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2024. Towards building multilingual lan-guage model for medicine. Nature Communications ,15(1):8384. Shi Qiu, Shaoyang Guo, Zhuo-Yang Song, Yunbo Sun, Zeyu Cai, Jiashen Wei, Tianyu Luo, Yixuan Yin, Zhang Haoxu, Yi Hu, Chenyang Wang, Chencheng Tang, Haoling Chang, Qi Liu, Ziheng Zhou, Tianyu Zhang, Jingtian Zhang, Zhangyi Liu, Minghao Li, and 34 others. 2025. PHYBench: Holistic evalua-tion of physical perception and reasoning in large language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Paul Raccuglia, Katherine C. Elbert, Philip D. F. Adler, Casey Falk, Malia B. Wenny, Aurelio Mollo, Matthias Zeller, Sorelle A. Friedler, Joshua Schrier, and Alexander J. Norquist. 2016. Machine-learning-assisted materials discovery using failed experiments. 

Nature , 533(7601):73–76. Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. 2018. Improving language under-standing by generative pre-training. Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, and 1 others. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learn-ers. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9. Ilija Radosavovic, Tete Xiao, Bike Zhang, Trevor Dar-rell, Jitendra Malik, and Koushil Sreenath. 2024. Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement learning. Science Robotics , 9(89):eadi9579. Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text trans-former. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 21(1). Vishwanatha M. Rao, Serena Zhang, Brian S. Plosky, Patrick D. Hsu, Bo Wang, James Zou, Marinka Zitnik, Eric J. Topol, and Pranav Rajpurkar. 2026. General-ist biological artificial intelligence in modeling the language of life. Nature Biotechnology .Markus Reichstein, Gustau Camps-Valls, Bjorn Stevens, Martin Jung, Joachim Denzler, Nuno Carvalhais, and Prabhat. 2019. Deep learning and process under-standing for data-driven earth system science. Na-ture , 566(7743):195–204. David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jack-son Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Ju-lian Michael, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2024. GPQA: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. In 

First Conference on Language Modeling .Malte Reinschmidt, József Fortágh, Andreas Günther, and Valentin V. Volchkov. 2024. Reinforcement learning in cold atom experiments. Nature Com-munications , 15(1):8532. Shuo Ren, Pu Jian, Zhenjiang Ren, Chunlin Leng, Can Xie, and Jiajun Zhang. 2025. Towards scientific in-telligence: A survey of llm-based scientific agents. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.24047. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion mod-els. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) ,pages 10684–10695. Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. 2024. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature , 625(7995):468–475. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. 2015. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241. Jie Ruan, Inderjeet Jayakumar Nair, Shuyang Cao, Amy Liu, Sheza Munir, Micah Pollens-Dempsey, Yune-Ting Tiffany Chiang, Lucy R. Kates, Nicholas David, Sihan Chen, Ruxin Yang, Yuqian Yang, Jihyun Jas-mine Gump, Tessa Bialek, Vivek S Sankaran, Margo Schlanger, and Lu Wang. 2026. Expertlongbench: Benchmarking language models on expert-level long-form generation tasks with structured checklists. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Yixiang Ruan, Chenyin Lu, Ning Xu, Yuchen He, Yixin Chen, Jian Zhang, Jun Xuan, Jianzhang Pan, Qun Fang, Hanyu Gao, and 1 others. 2024. An automatic end-to-end chemical synthesis development platform powered by large language models. Nature commu-nications , 15(1):10160. Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. 2018. Inverse molecular design using machine learn-ing: Generative models for matter engineering. Sci-ence , 361(6400):360–365. Moritz Schaefer, Peter Peneder, Daniel Malzl, Salvo Danilo Lombardo, Mihaela Peycheva, Jake Burton, Anna Hakobyan, Varun Sharma, Thomas Krausgruber, Celine Sin, and 1 others. 2025. Mul-timodal learning enables chat-based exploration of single-cell data. Nature Biotechnology , pages 1–11. Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessí, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettle-moyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: language models can teach themselves to use tools. In Proceedings of the 37th International 

30 Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , NIPS ’23. Marwin H. S. Segler, Mike Preuss, and Mark P. Waller. 2018. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural networks and symbolic ai. Nature , 555(7698):604– 610. Alireza Seif, Mohammad Hafezi, and Christopher Jarzynski. 2021. Machine learning the thermody-namic arrow of time. Nature Physics , 17(1):105– 113. Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. 2016. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1715–1725. Erzhuo Shao, Yifang Wang, Yifan Qian, Zhenyu Pan, Han Liu, and Dashun Wang. 2025a. Sciscigpt: ad-vancing human–ai collaboration in the science of science. Nature Computational Science .Rulin Shao, Akari Asai, Shannon Zejiang Shen, Hamish Ivison, Varsha Kishore, Jingming Zhuo, Xinran Zhao, Molly Park, Samuel G. Finlayson, David Sontag, Tyler Murray, Sewon Min, Pradeep Dasigi, Luca Soldaini, Faeze Brahman, Wen tau Yih, Tong-shuang Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yoon Kim, and 2 others. 2025b. Dr tulu: Reinforcement learning with evolving rubrics for deep research. Preprint ,arXiv:2511.19399. Manasi Sharma, Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Chaithanya Bandi, Clinton Wang, Ankit Aich, Huy Nghiem, Tahseen Rabbani, Ye Htet, Brian Jang, Sumana Basu, Aishwarya Balwani, Denis Peskoff, Marcos Ayestaran, Sean M. Hendryx, Brad Kenstler, and Bing Liu. 2025. Researchrubrics: A benchmark of prompts and rubrics for evaluating deep research agents. Preprint , arXiv:2511.07685. Yu-Zhe Shi, Shiqian Li, Xinyi Niu, Qiao Xu, Jiawen Liu, Yifan Xu, Shiyu Gu, Bingru He, Xinyang Li, Xinyu Zhao, Zijian Zhao, Yidong Lyu, Zhen Li, Sijia Liu, Lin Qiu, Jinhao Ji, Lecheng Ruan, Yuxi Ma, Wenjuan Han, and Yixin Zhu. 2023. PersLEARN: Research training through the lens of perspective cultivation. In ACL: System Demonstrations .Zhengliang Shi, Yiqun Chen, Haitao Li, Weiwei Sun, Shiyu Ni, Yougang Lyu, Run-Ze Fan, Bowen Jin, Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Qiujie Xie, Xinyu Guo, Qu Yang, Jiayi Wu, Jujia Zhao, Xiaqiang Tang, Xin-bei Ma, Cunxiang Wang, Jiaxin Mao, and 7 oth-ers. 2025a. Deep research: A systematic survey. 

Preprints .Zhengliang Shi, Shen Gao, Lingyong Yan, Yue Feng, Xiuyi Chen, Zhumin Chen, Dawei Yin, Suzan Ver-berne, and Zhaochun Ren. 2025b. Tool learning in the wild: Empowering language models as automatic tool agents. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Con-ference 2025 , WWW ’25, page 2222–2237. Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2023. Re-flexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , NIPS ’23. Artem Shmatko, Alexander Wolfgang Jung, Kumar Gau-rav, Søren Brunak, Laust Hvas Mortensen, Ewan Birney, Tom Fitzgerald, and Moritz Gerstung. 2025. Learning the natural history of human disease with generative transformers. Nature , 647(8088):248– 256. Chenglei Si, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Diyi Yang. 2025a. The ideation-execution gap: Execution out-comes of llm-generated versus human research ideas. 

Preprint , arXiv:2506.20803. Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025b. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a large-scale human study with 100+ NLP researchers. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S. Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales, Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl, Perry Payne, Martin Seneviratne, Paul Gam-ble, Chris Kelly, Abubakr Babiker, Nathanael Schärli, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Philip Mansfield, Dina Demner-Fushman, and 13 others. 2023. Large lan-guage models encode clinical knowledge. Nature ,620(7972):172–180. Karan Singhal, Tao Tu, Juraj Gottweis, Rory Sayres, Ellery Wulczyn, Mohamed Amin, Le Hou, Kevin Clark, Stephen R Pfohl, Heather Cole-Lewis, and 1 others. 2025. Toward expert-level medical ques-tion answering with large language models. Nature Medicine , 31(3):943–950. Guijin Son, Jiwoo Hong, Honglu Fan, Heejeong Nam, Hyunwoo Ko, Seungwon Lim, Jinyeop Song, Jinha Choi, Gonçalo Paulo, Youngjae Yu, and Stella Bi-derman. 2025. When ai co-scientists fail: Spot-a benchmark for automated verification of scientific research. Preprint , arXiv:2505.11855. Zhangde Song, Jieyu Lu, Yuanqi Du, Botao Yu, Thomas M. Pruyn, Yue Huang, Kehan Guo, Xiuzhe Luo, Yuanhao Qu, Yi Qu, Yinkai Wang, Haorui Wang, Jeff Guo, Jingru Gan, Parshin Shojaee, Di Luo, Andres M Bran, Gen Li, Qiyuan Zhao, and 37 others. 2025. Evaluating large language models in scientific discovery. Preprint , arXiv:2512.15567. Brian K. Spears, Scott Brandon, Dan T. Casey, John E. Field, Jim A. Gaffney, Kelli D. Humbird, Andrea L. Kritcher, Michael K. G. Kruse, Eugene Kur, Bog-dan Kustowski, S. Langer, Dave Munro, Ryan Nora, J. Luc Peterson, Dave J. Schlossberg, Paul Springer, and Alex Zylstra. 2025. Predicting fusion ignition at the national ignition facility with physics-informed deep learning. Science , 389(6761):727–731. 

31 Giulio Starace, Oliver Jaffe, Dane Sherburn, James Aung, Jun Shern Chan, Leon Maksin, Rachel Dias, Evan Mays, Benjamin Kinsella, Wyatt Thompson, Johannes Heidecke, Amelia Glaese, and Tejal Pat-wardhan. 2025. Paperbench: Evaluating AI’s ability to replicate AI research. In Forty-second Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning .Sandra Steyaert, Marija Pizurica, Divya Nagaraj, Priya Khandelwal, Tina Hernandez-Boussard, Andrew J Gentles, and Olivier Gevaert. 2023. Multimodal data fusion for cancer biomarker discovery with deep learning. Nature machine intelligence , 5(4):351–362. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Daniel M. Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul Christiano. 2020. Learning to summarize from human feedback. In Proceed-ings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20. Jonathan M Stokes, Kevin Yang, Kyle Swanson, Wen-gong Jin, Andres Cubillos-Ruiz, Nina M Donghia, Craig R MacNair, Shawn French, Lindsey A Carfrae, Zohar Bloom-Ackermann, and 1 others. 2020. Adeep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell ,180(4):688–702. Haoyang Su, Renqi Chen, Shixiang Tang, Zhenfei Yin, Xinzhe Zheng, Jinzhe Li, Biqing Qi, Qi Wu, Hui Li, Wanli Ouyang, Philip Torr, Bowen Zhou, and Nanqing Dong. 2025. Many heads are better than one: Improved scientific idea generation by a LLM-based multi-agent system. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 28201– 28240. Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. 2024. Roformer: En-hanced transformer with rotary position embedding. 

Neurocomput. , 568(C). Liangtai Sun, Yang Han, Zihan Zhao, Da Ma, Zhen-nan Shen, Baocai Chen, Lu Chen, and Kai Yu. 2024. Scieval: A multi-level large language model evalua-tion benchmark for scientific research. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,38(17):19053–19061. Tao Sun, Enhao Pan, Zhengkai Yang, Kaixin Sui, Ji-ajun Shi, Xianfu Cheng, Tongliang Li, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, Jian Yang, and Zhoujun Li. 2026. P2p: Automated paper-to-poster generation and fine-grained benchmark. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Kyle Swanson, Wesley Wu, Nash L Bulaong, John E Pak, and James Zou. 2025. The virtual lab of ai agents designs new sars-cov-2 nanobodies. Nature ,646:716–723. Nathan J. Szymanski, Bernardus Rendy, Yuxing Fei, Rishi E. Kumar, Tanjin He, David Milsted, Matthew J. McDermott, Max Gallant, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Amil Merchant, Haegyeom Kim, Anubhav Jain, Christo-pher J. Bartel, Kristin Persson, Yan Zeng, and Ger-brand Ceder. 2023. An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic materials. Na-ture , 624(7990):86–91. Jiabin Tang, Lianghao Xia, Zhonghang Li, and Chao Huang. 2025. AI-researcher: Autonomous scientific innovation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Cristopher Tinajero, Marcileia Zanatta, Julián ESánchez-Velandia, Eduardo García-Verdugo, and Victor Sans. 2025. Reac-discovery: an artificial intelligence–driven platform for continuous-flow cat-alytic reactor discovery and optimization. Nature Communications , 16(1):9062. Gary Tom, Stefan P Schmid, Sterling G Baird, Yang Cao, Kourosh Darvish, Han Hao, Stanley Lo, Ser-gio Pablo-García, Ella M Rajaonson, Marta Skreta, and 1 others. 2024. Self-driving laboratories for chemistry and materials science. Chemical Reviews ,124(16):9633–9732. Jingqi Tong, Mingzhe Li, Hangcheng Li, Yongzhuo Yang, Yurong Mou, Weijie Ma, Zhiheng Xi, Hongji Chen, Xiaoran Liu, Qinyuan Cheng, Ming Zhang, Qiguang Chen, Weifeng Ge, Qipeng Guo, Tianlei Ying, Tianxiang Sun, Yining Zheng, Xinchi Chen, Jun Zhao, and 4 others. 2026a. Ai can learn scientific taste. Preprint , arXiv:2603.14473. Shengbang Tong, David Fan, John Nguyen, Ellis Brown, Gaoyue Zhou, Shengyi Qian, Boyang Zheng, Théo-phane Vallaeys, Junlin Han, Rob Fergus, Naila Mur-ray, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis, Nicolas Bal-las, Amir Bar, Michael Rabbat, Jakob Verbeek, Luke Zettlemoyer, Koustuv Sinha, and 2 others. 2026b. Beyond language modeling: An exploration of multi-modal pretraining. Preprint , arXiv:2603.03276. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, and 49 oth-ers. 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. Preprint , arXiv:2307.09288. Dhruv Trehan and Paras Chopra. 2026. Why llms aren’t scientists yet: Lessons from four autonomous re-search attempts. Preprint , arXiv:2601.03315. Trieu H. Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V. Le, He He, and Thang Luong. 2024. Solving olympiad ge-ometry without human demonstrations. Nature ,625(7995):476–482. Vahe Tshitoyan, John Dagdelen, Leigh Weston, Alexan-der Dunn, Ziqin Rong, Olga Kononova, Kristin A. Persson, Gerbrand Ceder, and Anubhav Jain. 2019. Unsupervised word embeddings capture latent knowl-edge from materials science literature. Nature ,571(7763):95–98. 

32 Tao Tu, Mike Schaekermann, Anil Palepu, Khaled Saab, Jan Freyberg, Ryutaro Tanno, Amy Wang, Brenna Li, Mohamed Amin, Yong Cheng, Elahe Vedadi, Nenad Tomasev, Shekoofeh Azizi, Karan Singhal, Le Hou, Albert Webson, Kavita Kulkarni, S. Sara Mahdavi, Christopher Semturs, and 7 others. 2025. Towards conversational diagnostic artificial intelligence. Na-ture , 642(8067):442–450. Alan M Turing. 2007. Computing machinery and intelli-gence. In Parsing the Turing test: Philosophical and methodological issues in the quest for the thinking computer , pages 23–65. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 30. Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro, Boris Bolliet, Pablo Villanueva-Domingo, Adrian E. Bayer, Aidan Ac-quah, Chetana Amancharla, Almog Barzilay-Siegal, Pablo Bermejo, Camille Bilodeau, Pablo Cárde-nas Ramírez, Miles Cranmer, Urbano L. França, ChangHoon Hahn, Yan-Fei Jiang, Raul Jimenez, Jun-Young Lee, Antonio Lerario, Osman Mamun, Thomas Meier, and 17 others. 2025. The denario project: Deep knowledge ai agents for scientific dis-covery. Preprint , arXiv:2510.26887. Haiyuan Wan, Chen Yang, Junchi Yu, Meiqi Tu, Jiaxuan Lu, Di Yu, Jianbao Cao, Ben Gao, Jiaqing Xie, Aoran Wang, Wenlong Zhang, Philip Torr, and Dongzhan Zhou. 2025a. Deepresearch arena: The first exam of llms’ research abilities via seminar-grounded tasks. 

Preprint , arXiv:2509.01396. Yi Wan, Jiuqi Wang, Liam Li, Jinsong Liu, Ruihao Zhu, and Zheqing Zhu. 2025b. Pokeeresearch: Effec-tive deep research via reinforcement learning from ai feedback and robust reasoning scaffold. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.15862. Chengye Wang, Yifei Shen, Zexi Kuang, Arman Co-han, and Yilun Zhao. 2025a. SciVer: Evaluating foundation models for multimodal scientific claim verification. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8562–8579. Dilin Wang, Hyunyoung Jung, Tom Monnier, Kihyuk Sohn, Chuhang Zou, Xiaoyu Xiang, Yu-Ying Yeh, Di Liu, Zixuan Huang, Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Yuchen Fan, Sergiu Oprea, Ziyan Wang, Roman Shapo-valov, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Thibault Groueix, An-toine Toisoul, Prithviraj Dhar, Xiao Chu, and 6 oth-ers. 2025b. Worldgen: From text to traversable and interactive 3d worlds. Preprint , arXiv:2511.16825. Erik Y. Wang, Sumeet Motwani, James V. Roggeveen, Eliot Hodges, Dulhan Jayalath, Charles London, Kalyan Ramakrishnan, Flaviu Cipcigan, Philip Torr, and Alessandro Abate. 2026a. Horizonmath: Measur-ing ai progress toward mathematical discovery with automatic verification. Preprint , arXiv:2603.15617. Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak, Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, and 1 others. 2023a. Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature , 620(7972):47–60. Jiayu Wang, Yifei Ming, Riya Dulepet, Qinglin Chen, Austin Xu, Zixuan Ke, Frederic Sala, Aws Al-barghouthi, Caiming Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. 2026b. Liveresearchbench: Benchmarking single- and multi-agent systems for citation-grounded deep research. In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Jue Wang, Sidney Lisanza, David Juergens, Doug Tischer, Joseph L. Watson, Karla M. Castro, Robert Ragotte, Amijai Saragovi, Lukas F. Milles, Minkyung Baek, Ivan Anishchenko, Wei Yang, Der-rick R. Hicks, Marc Expòsit, Thomas Schlichthaerle, Jung-Ho Chun, Justas Dauparas, Nathaniel Bennett, Basile I. M. Wicky, and 5 others. 2022. Scaffolding protein functional sites using deep learning. Science ,377(6604):387–394. Ning Wang, Jiang Bian, Yuchen Li, Xuhong Li, Shahid Mumtaz, Linghe Kong, and Haoyi Xiong. 2024a. Multi-purpose rna language modelling with motif-aware pretraining and type-guided fine-tuning. Na-ture Machine Intelligence , 6(5):548–557. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao, Runxin Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Yu Wu, and Zhifang Sui. 2024b. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce LLMs step-by-step without human annotations. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 9426–9439. Qixun Wang, Xu Bai, Haofan Wang, Zekui Qin, and Anthony Chen. 2024c. Instantid: Zero-shot identity-preserving generation in seconds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07519 .Rui Wang, Ce Zhang, Jun-Yu Ma, Jianshu Zhang, Hon-gru Wang, Yi Chen, Boyang Xue, Tianqing Fang, Zhisong Zhang, Hongming Zhang, Haitao Mi, Dong Yu, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2025c. Explore to evolve: Scaling evolved aggregation logic via proactive on-line exploration for deep research agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.14438. Xiaoxuan Wang, Ziniu Hu, Pan Lu, Yanqiao Zhu, Jieyu Zhang, Satyen Subramaniam, Arjun R Loomba, Shichang Zhang, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. 2024d. Scibench: Evaluating college-level scientific problem-solving abilities of large language models. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning .Xinlong Wang, Yufeng Cui, Jinsheng Wang, Fan Zhang, Yueze Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Zhengxiong Luo, Quan Sun, Zhen Li, Yuqi Wang, Qiying Yu, Yingli Zhao, Yulong Ao, Xuebin Min, Chunlei Men, Boya Wu, Bo Zhao, Bowen Zhang, Liangdong Wang, and 7 others. 2026c. Multimodal learning with next-token prediction for large multimodal models. Nature .

33 Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Zhengxiong Luo, Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Jinsheng Wang, Fan Zhang, Yueze Wang, Zhen Li, Qiying Yu, Yingli Zhao, Yu-long Ao, Xuebin Min, Tao Li, Boya Wu, Bo Zhao, Bowen Zhang, Liangdong Wang, Guang Liu, and 6 others. 2024e. Emu3: Next-token prediction is all you need. Preprint , arXiv:2409.18869. Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023b. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In 

The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Yi Wang, Zhenting Huang, Zhaohan Ding, Ruoxue Liao, Yuan Huang, Xinzijian Liu, Jiajun Xie, Siheng Chen, and Linfeng Zhang. 2026d. Deploy-master: Au-tomating the deployment of 50,000+ agent-ready sci-entific tools in one day. Preprint , arXiv:2601.03513. Yizhou Wang, Chen Tang, Han Deng, Jiabei Xiao, Jiaqi Liu, Jianyu Wu, Jun Yao, Pengze Li, Encheng Su, Lintao Wang, Guohang Zhuang, Yuchen Ren, Ben Fei, Ming Hu, Xin Chen, Dongzhan Zhou, Junjun He, Xiangyu Yue, Zhenfei Yin, and 13 others. 2025d. Scireasoner: Laying the scientific reasoning ground across disciplines. Preprint , arXiv:2509.21320. Zhiyuan Wang, Bokui Chen, Yinya Huang, Qingxing Cao, Ming He, Jianping Fan, and Xiaodan Liang. 2025e. ORMind: A cognitive-inspired end-to-end reasoning framework for operations research. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 6: Indus-try Track) , pages 104–131. Joseph L. Watson, David Juergens, Nathaniel R. Ben-nett, Brian L. Trippe, Jason Yim, Helen E. Eisenach, Woody Ahern, Andrew J. Borst, Robert J. Ragotte, Lukas F. Milles, Basile I. M. Wicky, Nikita Hanikel, Samuel J. Pellock, Alexis Courbet, William Sheffler, Jue Wang, Preetham Venkatesh, Isaac Sappington, Susana Vázquez Torres, and 9 others. 2023. De novo design of protein structure and function with rfdiffu-sion. Nature , 620(7976):1089–1100. Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McK-inney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. 2025a. Browsecomp: A simple yet chal-lenging benchmark for browsing agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.12516. Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022a. Emer-gent abilities of large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022b. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22. Jiaqi Wei, Yuejin Yang, Xiang Zhang, Yuhan Chen, Xiang Zhuang, Zhangyang Gao, Dongzhan Zhou, Guangshuai Wang, Zhiqiang Gao, Juntai Cao, Zijie Qiu, Ming Hu, Chenglong Ma, Shixiang Tang, Jun-jun He, Chunfeng Song, Xuming He, Qiang Zhang, Chenyu You, and 8 others. 2025b. From ai for sci-ence to agentic science: A survey on autonomous scientific discovery. Preprint , arXiv:2508.14111. Zichen Wen, Boxue Yang, Shuang Chen, Yaojie Zhang, Yuhang Han, Junlong Ke, Cong Wang, Yicheng Fu, Jiawang Zhao, Jiangchao Yao, Xi Fang, Zhen Wang, Henxing Cai, Lin Yao, Zhifeng Gao, Yanhui Hong, Nang Yuan, Yixuan Li, Guojiang Zhao, and 15 others. 2026. Innovator-vl: A multimodal large language model for scientific discovery. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.19325. Jiayi Weng, Huayu Chen, Dong Yan, Kaichao You, Alexis Duburcq, Minghao Zhang, Yi Su, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2022. Tianshou: A highly modular-ized deep reinforcement learning library. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(267):1–6. Chengyue Wu, Xiaokang Chen, Zhiyu Wu, Yiyang Ma, Xingchao Liu, Zizheng Pan, Wen Liu, Zhenda Xie, Xingkai Yu, Chong Ruan, and 1 others. 2025a. Janus: Decoupling visual encoding for unified multimodal understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Confer-ence , pages 12966–12977. Fang Wu, Weihao Xuan, Heli Qi, Ximing Lu, Aaron Tu, Li Erran Li, and Yejin Choi. 2026. Deepsearch: Over-come the bottleneck of reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards via monte carlo tree search. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Jialong Wu, Baixuan Li, Runnan Fang, Wenbiao Yin, Liwen Zhang, Zhenglin Wang, Zhengwei Tao, Ding-Chu Zhang, Zekun Xi, Xiangru Tang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025b. Webdancer: Towards autonomous information seek-ing agency. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Jialong Wu, Wenbiao Yin, Yong Jiang, Zhenglin Wang, Zekun Xi, Runnan Fang, Linhai Zhang, Yulan He, Deyu Zhou, Pengjun Xie, and Fei Huang. 2025c. WebWalker: Benchmarking LLMs in web traversal. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10290–10305. Junde Wu, Jiayuan Zhu, Yuyuan Liu, Min Xu, and Yueming Jin. 2025d. Agentic reasoning: A stream-lined framework for enhancing LLM reasoning with agentic tools. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 28489– 28503. 

34 Tailin Wu and Max Tegmark. 2019. Toward an artifi-cial intelligence physicist for unsupervised learning. 

Phys. Rev. E , 100:033311. Yunjia Xi, Jianghao Lin, Yongzhao Xiao, Zheli Zhou, Rong Shan, Te Gao, Jiachen Zhu, Weiwen Liu, Yong Yu, and Weinan Zhang. 2025. A survey of llm-based deep search agents: Paradigm, optimization, evalua-tion, and challenges. Preprint , arXiv:2508.05668. Ting Xiao, Lei Shi, Yang Zhang, HaoFeng Yang, Zhe Wang, and Chenjia Bai. 2025. Online iterative self-alignment for radiology report generation. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 27799–27814. Core Team Xiaomi, Bangjun Xiao, Bingquan Xia, Bo Yang, Bofei Gao, Bowen Shen, Chen Zhang, Chenhong He, Chiheng Lou, Fuli Luo, Gang Wang, Gang Xie, Hailin Zhang, Hanglong Lv, Hanyu Li, Heyu Chen, Hongshen Xu, Houbin Zhang, Huaqiu Liu, and 107 others. 2026. Mimo-v2-flash technical report. Preprint , arXiv:2601.02780. Jinheng Xie, Weijia Mao, Zechen Bai, David Junhao Zhang, Weihao Wang, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Yuchao Gu, Zhijie Chen, Zhenheng Yang, and Mike Zheng Shou. 2025. Show-o: One single transformer to unify multimodal understanding and generation. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Liang Xu, Anqi Li, Lei Zhu, Hang Xue, Changtai Zhu, Kangkang Zhao, Haonan He, Xuanwei Zhang, Qiyue Kang, and Zhenzhong Lan. 2023. Superclue: A com-prehensive chinese large language model benchmark. 

Preprint , arXiv:2307.15020. Renjun Xu and Jingwen Peng. 2025. A comprehensive survey of deep research: Systems, methodologies, and applications. Preprint , arXiv:2506.12594. Tianze Xu, Pengrui Lu, Lyumanshan Ye, Xiangkun Hu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025a. Researcherbench: Evalu-ating deep ai research systems on the frontiers of scientific inquiry. Preprint , arXiv:2507.16280. Weize Xu, Erwin Poussi, Quan Zhong, Zehua Zeng, Christopher Zou, Xuehai Wang, Yifan Lu, Miao Cui, Daiji Okamura, Cinlong Huang, Jiayuan Ding, Zhe Zhao, Yuheng Yang, Xinhai Pan, Varshini Vijay, Naoki Konno, Nianping Liu, Lei Li, X. Rosa Ma, and 14 others. 2026a. Pantheonos: An evolvable multi-agent framework for automatic genomics discovery. 

bioRxiv .Yinuo Xu, Shuo Lu, Jianjie Cheng, Meng Wang, Qian-long Xie, Xingxing Wang, Ran He, and Jian Liang. 2026b. How to train your deep research agent? prompt, reward, and policy optimization in search-r1. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.19526. Zhijian Xu, Yilun Zhao, Manasi Patwardhan, Lovekesh Vig, and Arman Cohan. 2025b. Can LLMs iden-tify critical limitations within scientific research? a systematic evaluation on AI research papers. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 20652–20706. Junxi Yan, Zixi Wei, Jingtao Zhan, Qingyao Ai, and Yiqun LIU. 2026. What scales in cross-entropy scal-ing law? In The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Linyi Yang and Yixuan Weng. 2025. ResearStudio: A human-intervenable framework for building con-trollable deep research agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing: System Demonstrations ,pages 896–905. Songhua Yang, Hanjie Zhao, Senbin Zhu, Guangyu Zhou, Hongfei Xu, Yuxiang Jia, and Hongying Zan. 2024. Zhongjing: Enhancing the chinese medical capabilities of large language model through expert feedback and real-world multi-turn dialogue. Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence , 38(17):19368–19376. Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023a. Tree of thoughts: deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’23. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023b. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. Preprint , arXiv:2210.03629. Yang Yao, Yixu Wang, Yuxuan Zhang, Yi Lu, Tianle Gu, Lingyu Li, Dingyi Zhao, Keming Wu, Haozhe Wang, Ping Nie, Yan Teng, and Yingchun Wang. 2025. A rigorous benchmark with multidimensional evaluation for deep research agents: From answers to reports. Preprint , arXiv:2510.02190. Yi Yao, He Zhu, Piaohong Wang, Jincheng Ren, Xin-long Yang, Qianben Chen, Xiaowan Li, Dingfeng Shi, Jiaxian Li, Qiexiang Wang, Sinuo Wang, Xin-peng Liu, Jiaqi Wu, Minghao Liu, and Wangchunshu Zhou. 2026. O-researcher: An open ended deep re-search model via multi-agent distillation and agentic rl. Preprint , arXiv:2601.03743. Jie Ying, Zihong Chen, Zhefan Wang, Wanli Jiang, Chenyang Wang, Zhonghang Yuan, Haoyang Su, Huanjun Kong, Fan Yang, and Nanqing Dong. 2025. SeedBench: A multi-task benchmark for evaluating large language models in seed science. In Proceed-ings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 31395–31449. Tianhao Yu, Haiyang Cui, Jianan Canal Li, Yunan Luo, Guangde Jiang, and Huimin Zhao. 2023. Enzyme function prediction using contrastive learning. Sci-ence , 379(6639):1358–1363. 

35 Yipeng Yu. 2016. Cyborg Intelligent Systems Based on Brain-machine Integration: Research on Proto-types and Behavioral Verification . PhD Dissertation, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Yipeng Yu, Ran Guan, Jie Ma, Zhuoxuan Jiang, and Jingchang Huang. 2020. When and who? con-versation transition based on bot-agent symbiosis learning network. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 4056–4066. Yipeng Yu, Gang Pan, Yongyue Gong, Kedi Xu, Neng-gan Zheng, Weidong Hua, Xiaoxiang Zheng, and Zhaohui Wu. 2016. Intelligence-augmented rat cy-borgs in maze solving. PLOS ONE , 11(2):1–18. Mert Yuksekgonul, Daniel Koceja, Xinhao Li, Federico Bianchi, Jed McCaleb, Xiaolong Wang, Jan Kautz, Yejin Choi, James Zou, Carlos Guestrin, and Yu Sun. 2026. Learning to discover at test time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16175 .Claudio Zeni, Robert Pinsler, Daniel Zügner, Andrew Fowler, Matthew Horton, Xiang Fu, Zilong Wang, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Jonathan Crabbé, Shoko Ueda, Roberto Sordillo, Lixin Sun, Jake Smith, Bich-lien Nguyen, Hannes Schulz, Sarah Lewis, Chin-Wei Huang, Ziheng Lu, Yichi Zhou, and 7 others. 2025. A generative model for inorganic materials design. 

Nature , 639(8055):624–632. Dingling Zhang, He Zhu, Jincheng Ren, Kangqi Song, Xinran Zhou, Boyu Feng, Shudong Liu, Jiabin Luo, Weihao Xie, Zhaohui Wang, Tianrui Qin, King Zhu, Yuqing Wang, Qianben Chen, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Wei Wang, Jiaheng Liu, and Wangchunshu Zhou. 2025a. How far are we from genuinely useful deep research agents? Preprint , arXiv:2512.01948. He Zhang, Hailong Liu, Yushan Xu, Haoran Huang, Yiming Liu, Jia Wang, Yan Qin, Haiyan Wang, Lili Ma, Zhiyuan Xun, Xuzhuang Hou, Timothy K. Lu, and Jicong Cao. 2025b. Deep generative models design mrna sequences with enhanced translational capacity and stability. Science , 390(6773):eadr8470. He Zhang, Liang Zhang, Ang Lin, Congcong Xu, Ziyu Li, Kaibo Liu, Boxiang Liu, Xiaopin Ma, Fanfan Zhao, Huiling Jiang, Chunxiu Chen, Haifa Shen, Hangwen Li, David H. Mathews, Yujian Zhang, and Liang Huang. 2023a. Algorithm for optimized mrna design improves stability and immunogenicity. Na-ture , 621(7978):396–403. Kai Zhang, Rong Zhou, Eashan Adhikarla, Zhiling Yan, Yixin Liu, Jun Yu, Zhengliang Liu, Xun Chen, Brian D Davison, Hui Ren, and 1 others. 2024. A gen-eralist vision–language foundation model for diverse biomedical tasks. Nature Medicine , 30(11):3129– 3141. Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023b. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3813– 3824. Pengsong Zhang, Xiang Hu, Guowei Huang, Yang Qi, Heng Zhang, Xiuxu Li, Jiaxing Song, Jiabin Luo, Yijiang Li, Shuo Yin, Chengxiao Dai, Eric Hanchen Jiang, Xiaoyan Zhou, Zhenfei Yin, Boqin Yuan, Jing Dong, Guinan Su, Guanren Qiao, Haiming Tang, and 4 others. 2025c. aixiv: A next-generation open access ecosystem for scientific discovery generated by ai scientists. Preprint , arXiv:2508.15126. Shuo Zhang, Chaofa Yuan, Ryan Guo, Xiaomin Yu, Rui Xu, Zhangquan Chen, Zinuo Li, Zhi Yang, Shuhao Guan, Zhenheng Tang, Sen Hu, Liwen Zhang, Rong-hao Chen, and Huacan Wang. 2026a. Evofsm: Con-trollable self-evolution for deep research with finite state machines. Preprint , arXiv:2601.09465. Wenlin Zhang, Xiaopeng Li, Yingyi Zhang, Pengyue Jia, Yichao Wang, Huifeng Guo, Yong Liu, and Xiangyu Zhao. 2025d. Deep research: A sur-vey of autonomous research agents. Preprint ,arXiv:2508.12752. Xuan Zhang, Limei Wang, Jacob Helwig, Youzhi Luo, Cong Fu, Yaochen Xie, Meng Liu, Yuchao Lin, Zhao Xu, Keqiang Yan, Keir Adams, Maurice Weiler, Xiner Li, Tianfan Fu, Yucheng Wang, Alex Strasser, Haiyang Yu, YuQing Xie, Xiang Fu, and 44 others. 2025e. Artificial intelligence for science in quantum, atomistic, and continuum systems. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 18(4):385–912. Yongjun Zhang. 2026. Vibe researching as wolf coming: Can ai agents with skills replace or augment social scientists? Preprint , arXiv:2602.22401. Yu Zhang, Yang Han, Shuai Chen, Ruijie Yu, Xin Zhao, Xianbin Liu, Kaipeng Zeng, Mengdi Yu, Jidong Tian, Feng Zhu, and 1 others. 2025f. Large language mod-els to accelerate organic chemistry synthesis. Nature Machine Intelligence , pages 1–13. Yuan-Hang Zhang and Massimiliano Di Ventra. 2023. Transformer quantum state: A multipurpose model for quantum many-body problems. Phys. Rev. B ,107:075147. Yunfan Zhang, Kathleen McKeown, and Smaranda Muresan. 2026b. Livenewsbench: Evaluating llm web search capabilities with freshly curated news. 

Preprint , arXiv:2602.13543. Keyu Zhao, Weiquan Lin, Qirui Zheng, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. 2025a. Deep ideation: Designing llm agents to generate novel research ideas on scientific concept network. Preprint , arXiv:2511.02238. Weike Zhao, Chaoyi Wu, Yanjie Fan, Pengcheng Qiu, Xiaoman Zhang, Yuze Sun, Xiao Zhou, Shuju Zhang, Yu Peng, Yanfeng Wang, Xin Sun, Ya Zhang, Yong-guo Yu, Kun Sun, and Weidi Xie. 2026. An agentic system for rare disease diagnosis with traceable rea-soning. Nature .Yilun Zhao, Kaiyan Zhang, Tiansheng Hu, Sihong Wu, Ronan Le Bras, Yixin Liu, Xiangru Tang, Joseph Chee Chang, Jesse Dodge, Jonathan Bragg, 

36 Chen Zhao, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Doug Downey, and Arman Cohan. 2025b. Sciarena: An open evalua-tion platform for non-verifiable scientific literature-grounded tasks. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Chuanyang Zheng, Yihang Gao, Han Shi, Minbin Huang, Jingyao Li, Jing Xiong, Xiaozhe Ren, Michael Ng, Xin Jiang, Zhenguo Li, and Yu Li. 2024a. Dape: data-adaptive positional encoding for length extrapolation. In Proceedings of the 38th In-ternational Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , NIPS ’24. Qiaoyu Zheng, Weike Zhao, Chaoyi Wu, Xiaoman Zhang, Lisong Dai, Hengyu Guan, Yuehua Li, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Weidi Xie. 2024b. Large-scale long-tailed disease diagnosis on radiol-ogy images. Nature Communications , 15(1):10147. Tianshi Zheng, Zheye Deng, Hong Ting Tsang, Weiqi Wang, Jiaxin Bai, Zihao Wang, and Yangqiu Song. 2025a. From automation to autonomy: A survey on large language models in scientific discovery. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 17733– 17750. Tianshi Zheng, Kelvin Kiu Wai Tam, Newt Nguyen Kim Hue Nam, Baixuan Xu, Zhaowei Wang, Cheng Jiayang, Hong Ting Tsang, Weiqi Wang, Jiaxin Bai, Tianqing Fang, Yangqiu Song, Ginny Wong, and Simon See. 2026. Newtonbench: Benchmarking gen-eralizable scientific law discovery in LLM agents. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyumanshan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025b. DeepResearcher: Scaling deep research via reinforce-ment learning in real-world environments. In Pro-ceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 414–431. Yuxiang Zheng, Shichao Sun, Lin Qiu, Dongyu Ru, Cheng Jiayang, Xuefeng Li, Jifan Lin, Binjie Wang, Yun Luo, Renjie Pan, Yang Xu, Qingkai Min, Zizhao Zhang, Yiwen Wang, Wenjie Li, and Pengfei Liu. 2024c. OpenResearcher: Unleashing AI for acceler-ated scientific research. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 209–218. Guangfeng Zhou, Domnita-Valeria Rusnac, Hahnbeom Park, Daniele Canzani, Hai Minh Nguyen, Lance Stewart, Matthew F. Bush, Phuong Tran Nguyen, Heike Wulff, Vladimir Yarov-Yarovoy, Ning Zheng, and Frank DiMaio. 2024. An artificial intelligence accelerated virtual screening platform for drug dis-covery. Nature Communications , 15(1):7761. Heng Zhou, Ao Yu, Yuchen Fan, Jianing Shi, Li Kang, Hejia Geng, Yongting Zhang, Yutao Fan, Yuhao Wu, Tiancheng He, Yiran Qin, Lei Bai, and Zhenfei Yin. 2025a. Livesearchbench: An automatically con-structed benchmark for retrieval and reasoning over dynamic knowledge. Preprint , arXiv:2511.01409. Junting Zhou, Wang Li, Yiyan Liao, Nengyuan Zhang, Tingjia Miao, Zhihui Qi, Yuhan Wu, and Tong Yang. 2025b. Scholarsearch: Benchmarking scholar search-ing ability of llms. Preprint , arXiv:2506.13784. Peilin Zhou, Bruce Leon, Xiang Ying, Can Zhang, Yifan Shao, Qichen Ye, Dading Chong, Zhiling Jin, Chenx-uan Xie, Meng Cao, Yuxin Gu, Sixin Hong, Jing Ren, Jian Chen, Chao Liu, and Yining Hua. 2025c. Browsecomp-zh: Benchmarking web browsing abil-ity of large language models in chinese. Preprint ,arXiv:2504.19314. Yuanchang Zhou, Siyu Hu, Xiangyu Zhang, Hongyu Wang, Guangming Tan, and Weile Jia. 2026. Ma-tRIS: Toward reliable and efficient pretrained ma-chine learning interaction potentials. In The Four-teenth International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations .Chiwei Zhu, Benfeng Xu, Mingxuan Du, Shaohan Wang, Xiaorui Wang, Zhendong Mao, and Yongdong Zhang. 2026. Fs-researcher: Test-time scaling for long-horizon research tasks with file-system-based agents. Preprint , arXiv:2602.01566. Xueyan Zou, Jianglong Ye, Hao Zhang, Xiaoyu Xi-ang, Mingyu Ding, Zhaojing Yang, Yong Jae Lee, Zhuowen Tu, Sifei Liu, and Xiaolong Wang. 2025. Real deep research for ai, robotics and beyond. 

Preprint , arXiv:2510.20809. 

37