Title: On the post-hoc Evaluation of PDE Discovery: A Multifaceted Challenge of Scientific Advancement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.23753v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 01:34:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
# On the post-hoc Evaluation of PDE Discovery: A Multifaceted Challenge of Scientific Advancement 

Baptiste Mathevon 1, Farah Cherfaoui 1, Amaury Habrard 1,2 and Marc Sebban 11Universit´ e Jean Monnet Saint-´Etienne, CNRS, Institut d’Optique Graduate School, Inria, Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, SAINT-´ETIENNE, France 

> 2

Institut Universitaire de France (IUF) 

Abstract 

Partial differential equation (PDE) discovery aims to identify from data the governing law of a physical system. Constituting a cornerstone of scientific advancement, it has become during the past decade a major line of research in the rapidly evolving field of Physics-informed Machine Learning (PiML). Among the remaining open problems to address in this domain, the post-hoc evaluation of discovered PDEs raises the particular difficulty of being multifaceted. Indeed, it requires jointly considering predictive accuracy, physical consistency, interpretability, and out-of-distribution generalization capacity. Given that some of these properties are conflicting, it is worth noting that the wide range of existing evaluation metrics only partially address the overall problem, potentially leading to overly interpreted conclusions about the validity of a presumed new physical theory. From an abundant literature spanning machine learning, numerical analysis, information theory or symbolic regression, we propose, to our knowledge, the first taxonomy of PDE evaluation metrics, and discuss their advantages and limitations in depth. Based on the observation that evaluation is often achieved on a case-by-case basis and that a universally accepted methodology remains elusive, we further provide recommendations with the aim of promoting standardized and reliable practices, before sketching promising future lines of research in this field. We argue that this paper is intended both for ML experts who design new PDE discovery algorithms and for users of these methods aiming, in real applications, to discover and validate well-founded scientific laws. 

# Contents 

1 Introduction 22 PDE discovery setting, notations and experimental setup 53 Metrics requiring access to the governing PDE 7

3.1 Recovery of the PDE terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73.2 Recovery of the PDE coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

4 Metrics independent from the ground truth analytical form 13 

4.1 Prediction errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 4.2 Sparsity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 4.3 Trade-off between prediction and sparsity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 4.4 Physical consistency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 4.5 Out-of-distribution generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

5 Practical guidelines for evaluating PDEs and perspectives 28 

1arXiv:2607.23753v1 [cs.LG] 26 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

Alongside forward problems such as learning fast neural surrogate solvers ( e.g. PINNs [1] or FNOs [2]), partial differential equation (PDE) discovery is one of the main inverse problems studied in the active field of Physics-informed Machine Learning (PiML) [3]. It consists in automatically identifying from simulation or observation data the governing equation(s) of a physical system. This task becomes especially critical when addressing real applications where there is no prior knowledge of the underlying physics (or only a partial understanding of it), which may involve the complex interplay of several physical phenomena. While a broad range of PDE discovery methods (see, e.g. , [4, 5, 6, 7, 8]) has flourished in the past few years, often envisioning the task from the perspective of sparse regression, it is worth noting that a universally accepted methodology for the systematic evaluation of identified PDEs remains unestablished [9]. The main reason is that post-hoc assessment, as commonly acknowledged in the literature [10, 11, 12], is inherently multifaceted and difficult to capture with a single measure, insofar as the fitness accuracy, physical consistency, parcimony and generalization capacity, have to be considered jointly. More precisely, we argue that a discovered PDE is expected to meet several objectives, some of which may be in conflict, that we propose to formulate in terms of the following key questions (see Fig. 1 for an overview): Q1: Does the identified PDE allow to lead to accurate solutions (up to numerical errors)? Q2: Is this equation physically consistent (i.e., is there any violation of fundamental physical principles)? Q3: Is it simple enough so as to be interpreted as a general scientific discovery? Q4: What is its ability to generalize out of distribution (long-horizon prediction, adaptation to different initial/boundary conditions or changes in dynamical regimes )? Q5: 

To what extent does it agree with the ground-truth (GT) governing PDE, when the latter is available? 

These questions naturally relate to the classical statistical learning setting, notably with respect to the bias–variance trade-off. In particular, Q1 is directly connected to data fidelity, while Q3 refers to model complexity. As in standard machine learning, increasing the latter may improve the former and reduce bias, but comes at the cost of higher variance; conversely, reducing model complexity may increase bias while lowering variance. However, beyond this similarity, the following distinction should be noted: the notion of complexity is stronger in PDE discovery because it demands interpretability and consistency at the level of a meaningful scientific law, thereby requiring going beyond mere sparsity. Therefore, we argue that in PDE discovery, the ” simpler is better ” paradigm is less straightforward than in conventional machine learning. On the other hand, it is worth noticing that Q4 extends the standard notion of generalization by explicitly targeting out-of-distribution extrapolation, which becomes central in dynamical systems. Indeed, it is often necessary in real applications to simulate the PDE under varying conditions, time horizons and regimes. Finally, while modern neural architectures may incorporate symmetries or equivariances which partially draw inspiration from physics, PDE discovery (via Q2 ) requires adherence to actual fundamental physical principles ( e.g. conservation laws), making the discovery and evaluation tasks more theoretically grounded. Evaluating a PDE solely through the lens of one of these questions can lead to drawing erroneous conclusions and formulating inconsistent hypotheses about the governing physical theory. For instance, it is well established that a small reconstruction error does not always reflect the symbolic correctness of the discovered equation ( e.g. , spurious terms that cause small errors over a short time period can lead, over a longer horizon, to a dramatic deterioration of the solutions). Moreover, despite the realistic assumption that most physical systems are governed by PDEs composed of a few terms, it is also widely known that the simplicity of an equation does not necessarily guarantee its physical consistency ( e.g. a sparse PDE may violate symmetry properties or conservation laws). On the other hand, as theoretically studied for PINNs [13, 14, 15], observing small residuals, even on unseen validation data, does not automatically mean that the discovered equation is correct and leads to accurate solutions. Considering the diversity of metrics, which are hardly comparable since they capture different properties of the PDE, one may feel at a loss when it comes to determining whether a learned equation represents a valid physical law. 2Figure 1: Overview of PDE discovery and metrics (in blue) devoted to address the multifaceted challenge of post-hoc PDE evaluation in accordance with the five key principles to be met (in red). The illustrations of dynamics correspond to a physical system leading to complex pattern formation and chaotic behavior. They are simulated from either the ground truth Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation (P DE GT ) or a learned P DE A, or they correspond to observation data ( e.g. obtained by laser-matter interaction and self-organization of matter for which P DE GT is a good candidate for modeling the phenomenon). Three sets are used in PDE discovery: a training set T is employed for learning P DE A

with some algorithm A; a validation set V is compared to a set E of estimated solutions, simulated from P DE A, for evaluating the discovered law from a pointwise or trajectory perspective. Although PDE evaluation is intrinsically multi-criteria, we emphasize that this paper is not positioned within a multi-objective optimization framework [16], where one typically seeks Pareto-optimal solutions to identify trade-offs among conflicting criteria as done, e.g. , in genetic algorithms, decomposition-based methods, multi-objective gradient-based approaches, etc. Said differently, we do not view the metrics considered in this study as means of guiding PDE discovery algorithms (some of those criteria are non-separable functions and cannot even be optimized). Instead, they are treated as post-training measures to evaluate an equation, during a downstream task, regardless of the mechanism from which it originates. Nonetheless, certain metrics commonly used in multi-objective optimization can be leveraged in post-hoc PDE evaluation. This applies to those employed in symbolic regression [17] 1, which will thus be studied below. By decoupling the identified PDE from the discovery process, we shift the focus of the evaluation task from the learning algorithm to the scientific discovery itself. Moreover, by doing so, we argue that these metrics may thus be applied in scenarios that do not necessarily involve learning but still require a valid evaluation procedure 2. This may hold, for instance, when human experts formulate 

> 1A substantial part of the PDE discovery literature can be cast, as a special case, within this framework, albeit more challenging due to the presence of derivative terms.
> 2Note that for the sake of consistency in notation and terminology, we will remain within the scope of conventional PDE discovery throughout this article, assuming that the equation has been learned from data, while not exploiting the algorithm itself in the downstream evaluation task.

3a new hypothesis for a physical law based on their own theoretical knowledge and observations of a physical system. It also applies in an attempt to simplify a complex existing law , motivated e.g. by the need (i) to reduce the computational cost, making large-scale simulations feasible, (ii) to isolate the dominant physical mechanisms, thereby improving interpretability, or (iii) to facilitate theoretical analysis (existence/uniqueness of solutions, asymptotic guarantees, etc.) that would be impossible without sparsifying the equation. The comparison of competing conjectures proposed in the literature to model the same phenomenon constitutes another example of setting where post-hoc evaluation can be highly beneficial. By focusing on the discovered knowledge, note that two properties frequently studied in PDE discovery literature will not be considered in this article: the robustness (i) to the presence of noise, and (ii) to scarcity in the training data. Both indeed characterize the performance of the discovery algorithm itself. With this clarification in mind, we can now outline the main contributions of this paper: 1. Drawing from a vast body of literature at the intersection of machine learning, information theory, symbolic regression, but also by leveraging verification criteria from numerical analysis, we establish a taxonomy of PDE evaluation metrics . We do not limit this classification to a mere enumeration of formulae. Instead, we provide a comprehensive analysis, examining for each of the metrics its properties, advantages , and limitations . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study which conducts such an in-depth analysis and gathers the state-of-the-art metrics previously dispersed across different scientific domains. To illustrate the practical use of these criteria, we rely throughout this study on a running example on the non linear fourth-order Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation (illustrated in Fig. 1), which presents a chaotic behavior and allows to model complex pattern formation and instabilities in various physical systems. The experiments performed with this non trivial equation (see all paragraphs entitled “ Running Example ” which constitute milestones of this paper) enable a better understanding of these metrics and sometimes reveal pathological behaviors exhibited by some of them. 2. The classification proposed, together with the analysis of PDE evaluation metric behaviors on the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky PDE, allows us to formulate general cautions and recommen-dations . The goal is to address the pressing need for standardizing PDE evaluation (as recently stated in [18]) so as to avoid overstating the validity of identified laws. From this dis-cussion, we outline a set of promising research directions to meet: (i) the need to better 

account for the functional properties of the discovered equation, unlike ML-conventional pointwise metrics. We notably discuss the use of tools from functional analysis, as well as opti-mal transport and gradient flows; (ii) the necessity of considering the numerical solvability 

of the model as an additional key criterion to allow large and small-scale simulations when ad-dressing real-world applications. This aspect is strikingly underexplored in the PDE evaluation literature, and (iii) the value of designing new measures specifically tailored to the evalua-tion of fractional PDEs . Indeed, the ability of these equations to account for nonlocal effects makes them particularly attractive for modeling certain complex, multiscale, and memory-driven phenomena; however, the expressiveness and intrinsic complexity of fractional-order derivatives reduce the relevance of classical metrics. We argue that this paper could provide valuable insights for machine learning experts developing new PDE discovery algorithms, and may also be of interest to scientists in other domains where modeling dynamics through equations plays a crucial role, e.g. , in physics, chemistry, or biology, seeking a comprehensive understanding of PDE evaluation. To enable them to easily compute the metrics presented throughout this survey on their own PDEs, we have developed the following user-friendly GitHub repository: PDE-Evaluation. 4Table 1: Capacity of the investigated metrics to answer the 5 key questions in PDE evaluation. The last four rows of the table do not, strictly speaking, represent evaluation metrics, but rather physical properties discussed in Sec. 4.4 that can be used to assess the physical consistency of the PDE. 

Solution Physical Interpretation Generalization GT PDE Accuracy Consistency Sparsity Capacity Recovery Metrics Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 

T P R (α, ˆα) (4) J(α, ˆα) (7) ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔

P (α, ˆα) (5) R(α, ˆα) (6) ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔

LM M ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔

ϵpcoef (α, ˆα) (8)-(10) ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✔

wϵ 2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (12)-(13) ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘ ✔

N DCG (α, ˆα) (14) ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘ ✔

TG(α, ˆα) (17) ✘ ✘ ✘ ✘ ✔

M SE/M AE on u (18)-(20) ✔ ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘

M SE on ut (21) ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

f M SE (F(ˆ u), F(u)) (23) ✔ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) (24) ✔ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

Sterms ( ˆα) (25) ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘

C( ˆα⊤.Θ) (26) ✘ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘

Score ( ˆα) (27) ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘

Reward 1,2( ˆα) (28) (29) ✘ ✔ ✔ ✘ ✘

AIC c (31), BIC (32) ✘ ✔ ✔ ✘ ✘

P IC (33) ✔ ✔ ✔ ✘ ✘

M DL (34) (35) ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘ ✘

ϵT ′

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) (37) ✔ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

Conv x( ˆα) (38) ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

Conv t( ˆα) (39) ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

Physical properties 4.4: ✘ ✔ ✘ ✔ ✘

Symmetries, Conservation Laws Residuals, Dimensional Consistency Positivity Preservation, Convection Energy Dissipation, etc. 

The rest of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the PDE discovery setting, the notations used, as well as the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) equation employed as running example throughout our study. Section 3 is devoted to the presentation of metrics that require the access to the governing equation P DE GT . Since this setting is more appropriate for evaluating an algorithm’s capability to recover P DE GT and less suited to scientific discovery, we relax this constraint in Section 4 and present metrics that can be applied even when the governing analytical form is not available. The findings of our review are summarized in Table 1 reporting the metric capacity to answer the five aforementioned questions. In Section 4, we also discuss various methods for evaluating the physical consistency of a PDE through the verification of relevant physical properties. Finally, we outline in Section 5 key recommendations along with the main pitfalls to be avoided when evaluating an equation. We conclude this article by sketching several promising directions for PDE evaluation. 

# 2 PDE discovery setting, notations and experimental setup 

Let us consider equations of the following general form: ut = N [u], with u ∈ Cn([0 , T ] × Ω; Rd2 ), an n-times continuously differentiable function modeling a vector field; ut is the time derivative, and 

N [·] is a (possibly nonlinear) differential operator, with t ∈ [0 , T ] the temporal variable bounded by a finite time horizon T and x ∈ Ω ⊂ Rd the spatial coordinates belonging to a bounded input domain. 5The equations may also be accompanied by initial and boundary conditions (denoted by IC and BC, respectively) that must be satisfied at the initial time or on the boundaries of the domain. In the following, the notation ux denotes the partial derivative with respect to the input spatial domain, uxx 

corresponds to the second order derivative, etc. The PDE discovery paradigm is based on the realistic assumption that in most physical laws only a few important terms govern the underlying dynamics, that encourages promoting sparsity. For this reason, many algorithms address the problem from a sparse regression perspective by approximating the differential operator into the form of a parsimonious linear combination of preselected terms from a finite dictionary, typically composed of partial space derivatives ( i.e. ux1 , ux1x1 , ux1x2 , ux1 ux2 ,etc.), polynomials ( e.g. u3) and constants. Since the success of such strategy is closely tied to the completeness of the dictionary, the design of the latter remains a challenge. This is why free-form strategies are used in symbolic regression ( e.g. , resorting to genetic programming, tree-based search algorithms, transformers, etc.) to adapt the expression being searched for to the task at hand. Nevertheless, without loss of generality, we can assume here that PDE discovery can be reduced to producing a linear combination of terms in the form of an estimate ˆ ut = ˆα⊤.Θ where Θ is a vector of size |Θ| whose components are evaluations of linear and non linear functions at ( t, x) and ˆα is a 

|Θ| × d2 matrix containing the learned coefficients associated with each term of Θ for the d2 governing equations. Let us assume that ˆα has been learned with some PDE discovery algorithm from a training set T = {u(ti, xi)}nT 

> i=1

composed of nT simulation data in the scenario where the ground truth equation P DE GT is known, or observation data when the theory governing the dynamical system is not yet identified. Moreover, we also assume we have at our disposal a validation set 

V = {u(tj , xj )}nV 

> j=1

that will be used, depending on the type of metrics, for evaluating the identified PDEs. Note that V might be obtained from different IC and BC and beyond the training time horizon to evaluate the capacity of the learned PDEs to adapt to out-of-distribution tasks. For the sake of simplifying the notations, we will assume in the following that d2 = 1, meaning that 

u is a scalar field. In this scenario, ˆα⊤ = ( ˆα1, . . . , ˆαi, . . . , ˆα|Θ|) becomes a vector of size |Θ|. Note that most of the metrics presented in this paper can be readily applied to any d2-dimensional dynamics. 

Running Example: As mentioned above, we consider the following fourth-order non linear 1D Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) PDE, which will serve as running example throughout the paper: 

P DE GT : ut = −1.0uu x − 1.0uxx − 1.0uxxxx . (1) This equation will be solved using periodic BC and the following IC: cos(2 πx/L )+0 .5 cos(4 πx/L +0 .3). Let us assume that an algorithm A discovered from T the following equation: 

P DE A : ˆ ut = −0.99 uu x − 0.98 uxx − 0.985 uxxxx . (2) Let us further assume that another algorithm B identified a second equation defined as: 

P DE B : ˆ ut = −0.89 uu x − 0.9uxx − 0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u − 0.0008 uxuxx . (3) Note that we intentionally use as P DE B an equation that is “farther” 3 from P DE GT than P DE A

leading to larger differences between solutions, especially as time progresses (see simulations in Fig. 2), thereby allowing us to assess the ability of the metrics to distinguish the quality of the two equations. Using our notations, the true vector of coefficients α⊤ = (0 , −1, −1, −1, 0), while the vectors learned by A and B are ˆα⊤A = (0 , −0.99 , −0.98 , −0.985 , 0) and ˆα⊤B = (0 .0004 , −0.89 , −0.9, −0.85 , −0.0008) respectively, all of them associated with Θ ⊤ = ( u, uu x, u xx , u xxxx , u xuxx ). 

> 3Although this term remains ambiguous at this stage of the paper, it refers quite objectively to deviations in both the coefficients and the functions involved.

6Figure 2: Simulated solutions of the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation P DE GT (left) and 2 learned equations, P DE A (center) and P DE B (right). For the purpose of this running example, P DE A is by construction much more similar to the ground truth than P DE B. Indeed, we can observe that P DE B

gradually diverges over time from the true physical dynamics modeled by P DE GT .

Experimental setup: For the experiments requiring validation data V simulated from P DE GT and estimated solutions E obtained from P DE A and P DE B (this concerns all metrics discussed in Sec. 4), we will use the numerical method ETD1 (Exponential Time Differencing, 1st order) and solve the equations over a time T = 50 with a time step δt = 0 .05 yielding a temporal discretization with 

Nt = 1000 steps. We use a spatial mesh Nx = 1024 over a periodic domain of length L = 22, which yields a spatial spacing δx = L/N x ≈ 0.0215. This way, we collect datasets V and E consisting of 

nV = Nx × Nt = 1 , 024 , 000 data, defined as solutions evaluated at the same ( t, x) coordinates allowing pointwise comparisons. Depending on the setting (in-distribution or out-of-distribution), the sets V

and E will be simulated using either the same or different IC and BC as T .

# 3 Metrics requiring access to the governing PDE 

We begin this review with criteria that require access to the analytical expression of the governing law 

P DE GT . Although this category of PDE evaluation metrics may appear somewhat contradictory at first sight (why allow the use of P DE GT when the goal is to discover it?), it is worth noticing that most papers presenting a new PDE discovery algorithm assume in their experimental setup that the target equation is known; and they directly use the latter in the evaluation. This way, rather than focusing on assessing a discovered PDE as a new physical theory, these works primarily aim to evaluate the algorithm’s ability to recover a known equation used for proof-of-concept purposes. Under this scenario, several metrics can be employed to check the accuracy of either the learned symbolic expression (Sec. 3.1) or the coefficients associated with its terms (Sec. 3.2). 

3.1 Recovery of the PDE terms 

Using our notations, let us recall that PDE discovery looks for equations of the form ˆ ut = ˆα⊤.Θ. Metrics discussed in this section are based on the functions involved in this symbolic expression, i.e. 

those associated with coefficients αi̸ = 0. They primarily help answer Question Q5 (which concerns the recovery of P DE GT ). Additionally, they indirectly provide insights on Question Q3 (dealing with the sparsity). 

Support recovery : In [19], directly inspired by the well-known F1-score, the authors leverage the following true positive ratio (T P R ): 

T P R (α, ˆα) = T P (α, ˆα)

T P (α, ˆα) + F N (α, ˆα) + F P (α, ˆα) ∈ [0 , 1] , (4) 7Table 2: Application of the term recovery metrics (Sec. 3.1) to compare P DE A versus P DE B using the KS ground truth P DE GT as reference. A green point • (resp. •) corresponds to a better (resp. worse) evaluation score w.r.t. P DE GT . By construction of the equations, P DE A is expected to achieve better scores. An • point corresponds to a tie situation, where the metric is unable to distinguish between the two PDEs. 

P DE A P DE B             

> ˆut=−0.99 uu xˆut=−0.89 uu x−0.9uxx
> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

T P R (α, ˆα) (4) 1 • 3/5 •P (α, ˆα) (5) 1 • 3/5 •R(α, ˆα) (6) 1 • 1 •

LLM (α, ˆα)

“They are approximately equivalent, differing only by small numerical esti-mation errors.” 

# •

“They are structurally similar, the two extra terms are small and likely spu-rious, but there is no set of constant parameter values that makes the two equivalent.” 

# •

where T P (True Positives ) denotes the number of correctly-identified nonzero coefficients, and F N 

(False Negatives ) - resp. F P (False Positives ), stands for the number of coefficients that are incorrectly specified as zero (resp. nonzero). This metric has been used in several PDE discovery methods, including the Mechanistic PDE Networks [20], or Adjoint-PDE-FIND [21]. Rather than using T P R as a measure of overall structural similarity, one can rather exploit the so-called Precision P and Recall R.This is the post-hoc evaluation strategy used in PhysPDE [9], an algorithm guiding and constraining the discovery of PDE expressions with prior physical hypotheses. P and R are respectively defined in the classical way as follows: 

P (α, ˆα) = T P (α, ˆα)

T P (α, ˆα) + F P (α, ˆα) ∈ [0 , 1] , (5) 

R(α, ˆα) = T P (α, ˆα)

T P (α, ˆα) + F N (α, ˆα) ∈ [0 , 1] . (6) In PDE evaluation, combining P and R instead of a single T P R -like measure provides a more balanced assessment by jointly capturing how well the discovered derivatives match the true underlying terms while penalizing both missing relevant differential terms and introducing spurious ones. Note that T P R is also referred in the literature to as Jaccard index J (see [22] and MIO-SINDY [23]) or as Tanimoto coefficient T [24], both defined as the following function on sets: 

J(α, ˆα) = T (α, ˆα) = |S (α) ∩ S ( ˆα)||S (α) ∪ S ( ˆα)| ∈ [0 , 1] , (7) where S(α) = {Θi : αi̸ = 0 } and S( ˆα) = {Θi : ˆαi̸ = 0 }.Although T P R (and hence J and T ) are not specifically designed to evaluate the sparsity of the learned model, values close to 1 indicate that the structure of P DE GT has been successfully recovered. As it is generally accepted that most physical laws can be expressed with a small number of terms, a T P R close to 1 means that the equation is therefore also likely to be parsimonious. These metric can therefore also be considered as providing a partial answer to Question Q3 regarding sparsity 

Symbolic accuracy with LLMs : Based on a paradigm that differs significantly from other classical methods, Foundation Models and in particular Large Language Models (LLMs) have 8recently gained interest for equation discovery (see, e.g. NeuroSymBO [25], Data-Driven Discovery (D3) framework [26] or [27]). In LLM-SRBench [28], beyond building many challenging problems across various scientific domains, the authors employ GPT-4o as an automated post-hoc evaluator to measure a symbolic accuracy between P DE GT and a discovered expression, after replacing constants with placeholders. The LLM is prompted to decide if the two equations are symbolically equivalent (with a request for algebraic justification) under a tolerance of small numerical mismatches in the coefficients. A prompt similar to the following is used: “Given the P DE GT expression and the hypothesis P DE A, determine if there exist any constant parameter values that would make P DE GT 

equivalent to P DE A”. Note that LLMs, as used in LLM-SRBench to prune the search space in the context of symbolic regression, are combined in [29] with a utility measure for each term θi of the equation and its associated coefficients αi (while holding the others fixed) to refine the list of candidate functions. 

Running Example: Let us experiment with the metrics presented in this section on the KS equation P DE GT and the learned equations P DE A and P DE B. The values of the metrics are reported in Table 2. For P DE A, from T P (α, ˆαA) = 3, F N (α, ˆαA) = 0 and F P (α, ˆαA) = 0, we get 

T P R (α, ˆαA) = 1, P (α, ˆαA) = 1 and R(α, ˆαA) = 1, reflecting that the structure has been perfectly recovered. On the other hand, from T P (α, ˆαB) = 3, F N (α, ˆαB) = 0 and F P (α, ˆαB) = 2 we get, as expected, a lower T P R (α, ˆαB) equal to 3 /5 with P (α, ˆαB) = 3 /5 and R(α, ˆαB) = 1. Different from 1, T P R and P capture well the presence of the spurious terms. Using LLMs as in LLM-SRBench, we get a better evaluation for P DE A than P DE B. The model further indicates that with the presence of the two additional terms u and uxuxx , there is no set of coefficients ˆαB that makes the two equations 

P DE B and P DE GT equivalent. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ T P R, P and R directly measure success of structural recovery. Moreover, they are invariant to the number of terms of the equations and their interpretation is intuitive (the higher the better). Although they do not directly measure the sparsity of the discovered PDEs, a value close to 1 indicates that the parsimony of P DE GT is recovered. For its part, LLMs have the benefit of justifying the decision and provide a binary final answer. 

✘ These metrics require P DE GT to be known. Moreover, T P R, P and R only assess the form of the PDE ( i.e. the terms involved in the equation) without evaluating the associated coefficients which have an impact on the shape of the dynamics. The symbolic accuracy provided by a LLM is not a reliable quantitative measure. Moreover, two close but different textual descriptions can make it difficult to compare competing PDEs. 

✔ ✘ 

3.2 Recovery of the PDE coefficients 

This section provides an overview of the main existing metrics built upon the magnitude of the learned coefficients ˆα. It ends with a presentation of some metrics that also consider information about the recovery of the terms. All of them primarily help answer Question Q5 .

Unweighted error on coefficients : Most PDE discovery papers quantify the deviation ϵpcoef between the learned PDE and P DE GT in terms of error on coefficients . Often defined as an unweighted error, ϵpcoef can take different forms depending on the norm ℓp used for the comparison between α and 

ˆα.For instance, one can leverage the classic normalized squared error ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (as used in Weak SINDy [30], Ensemble-SINDY [31] or MIO-SINDY [23]) which gives insights regarding the magnitudes 9of spurious coefficients: 

ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) = || α − ˆα|| 22

|| α|| 22

∈ R≥0. (8) Note that the following normalized absolute error ϵ1 

> coef

is preferred over ϵ2 

> coef

(which may over-penalize an error on only one coefficient) in several articles on PDE discovery (see, e.g. SINDY [4], PDE-NET [5], PDE-LEARN [7], EqGPT [32], Adjoint-PDE-FIND [21] or ABL-PDE [33]). 

ϵ1 

> coef

(α, ˆα) = || α − ˆα|| 1

|| α|| 1

∈ R≥0. (9) Based on the physical observation that a single misidentified coefficient can completely alter the law, Weak SINDy [30], and Mechanistic PDE Networks [20] resort to the more severe ℓ∞-based error on the true nonzero coefficients: 

ϵ∞ 

> coef

(α, ˆα) = max  

> i:αi̸=0

|αi − ˆαi||αi| ∈ R≥0. (10) Finally, in iNeural-SINDy [6], the absolute values are applied on each coefficient αi separately in order to take into account the fact that their respective order might be different, describing dynamics of varying scales: 

ϵ1 

> coef (i)

(αi, ˆαi) = |αi − ˆαi| ∈ R≥0, i = 1 .. |Θ|. (11) Considering that, depending on the PDE term it is associated with, a small variation in a coefficient may have a more or less significant impact on the overall dynamics, we discuss below metrics built upon weighted errors. 

Weighted error based on sensitivity analysis : Metrics presented above do not distinguish between coefficients that are numerically close but dynamically different, and those that are numeri-cally different but have negligible effect on the solution behavior, stability properties, and long-term evolution. One way to overcome this issue consists in assigning a weight wi to each coefficient αi

according to the impact of the associated function θi on the induced dynamics. Note that this strategy requires simulation data from P DE GT to allow the calculation of partial derivatives, as explained in the following. A first approach to define wi on the basis of a local sensitivity analysis of the solution with respect to the parameters αi is inspired by the Learning Gradient Flow (LGF) optimizer [34] as follows: 

wi ∝ ∂u ∂αi

> 22

,

leading to the following weighted error reflecting how perturbations in each coefficient propagate through the dynamics (note that this can be also applied to the ℓ1-based variant): 

wϵ 2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) = 

P|Θ| 

> i=1

wi(αi − ˆαi)2

P|Θ| 

> i=1

wi

∈ R≥0. (12) A second complementary approach accounts for the exponential amplification of perturbations along unstable dynamical directions. Let λ > 0 denote a dominant Lyapunov exponent [35] associated with the underlying dynamical system. One can define a time-dependent weighted sensitivity of the solution with respect to each parameter αi, as follows: 

wi(t) ∝ exp( λt ) ∂u ∂αi

> 22

.

10 This leads to a Lyapunov-informed metric of the form 

wLyap ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) = 

> |θ|

X

> i=1

Z T

> 0

exp( λt ) ∂u (t)

∂αi

> 22

dt 

!

(αi − ˆαi)2 ∈ R≥0. (13) Compared to Eq. 12, this formulation explicitly accounts for the fact that perturbations in chaotic or weakly stable regimes may remain negligible in the short term but grow exponentially over time. 

Rank on the coefficients : Another category of metrics consists in evaluating the discovered PDE using the rank of the terms, as used in [36]. The absolute values of the coefficients are sorted in decreasing order; then, the ranking vector of the learned PDE is compared with that of P DE GT . This way, the metric assesses the ability of the method to correctly prioritize from a coefficient perspective the key terms within the PDE. To compare the ranking vectors rank (α) and rank ( ˆα), one can resort, 

e.g. , to the normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain N DCG :

N DCG (α, ˆα) = DCG (rank ( ˆα)) 

DCG (rank (α)) ∈ R≥0. (14) where DCG is defined in [37] as follows: 

DCG (rank (α)) = 

> |Θ|

X

> i=1

rank (α)i

log 2(i + 1) ∈ R≥0. (15) The closer N DCG is to 1, the better the recovery of the GT coefficients. Even though, when equal to 1, this metric does not guarantee that P DE GT has been recovered, it nevertheless ensures that the most important local terms at the origin of the physical dynamics are correct, and therefore 

N DCG partially also answers Question Q2 about the physical consistency in the sense that the main coefficients governing the PDE are correctly recovered. 

Towards jointly considering terms and coefficients: Although a combination of the two may appear natural, it is worth noticing that there is no adopted metric in the related works that explicitly merges the support recovery and coefficient error into a single canonical formulation. We hypothesize that one reason could be that, since these metrics cannot be used during training (because P DE GT is assumed to be unknown and, moreover, T P R is non-separable, thus not optimizable), they are instead employed independently in a post-hoc manner, without the need to tune an additional hyperparameter to combine them. However, note that two criteria attempt to establish a link between the two and therefore deserve to be mentioned here. The first one corresponds to a normalized version of Eq.(11), as used in [38], as well as in PDE-READ [39], ABL-PDE [33] and ANN-PYSR [40]. This variant, which comes with the benefit that errors in large coefficients do not dominate, is defined as follows: if T P R (α, ˆα) = 1 then N ϵ 1 

> coef (i)

(αi, ˆαi) = 

( |αi− ˆαi||αi| ∈ R≥0, ∀i = 1 .. |Θ| s.t. αi̸ = 0 ,

0 otherwise . (16) The important point in Eq. 16 is that it is conditioned on first matching the GT structural terms. Second, the Tanimoto coefficient T , which originally deals with sets (as already defined in Eq.(7)), and is often used in chemical compound discovery based on molecular fingerprints [41, 42], has been extended to handle real-valued vectors. Using our notations, this generalized version TG is defined as follows: 

TG(α, ˆα) = α⊤ ˆα

|| α|| 22 + || ˆα|| 22 − α⊤ ˆα ∈ [0 , 1] . (17) 11 Table 3: Application of the coefficient recovery metrics (Sec. 3.2) to compare P DE A versus P DE B

using the KS ground truth equation P DE GT as reference. 

P DE A P DE B             

> ˆut=−0.99 uu xˆut=−0.89 uu x−0.9uxx
> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (8) 0.0002 • 0.0149 •ϵ1 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (9) 0.0150 • 0.1204 •ϵ∞ 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (10) 0.0200 • 0.1500 •wϵ 2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (12) 0.0002 • 0.0014 •N DCG (α, ˆα) (14) 0.9862 • 0.8855 •TG(α, ˆα) (17) 0.9998 • 0.9834 •

Note that if α and ˆα are binary vectors (presence/absence of terms), the original expression T

(Eq.(7)) and TG are equivalent. By comparing the coefficient vectors in this way, the extended Tanimoto metric accounts for both the PDE structure, through the presence or absence of candidate terms, and the magnitude of the associated coefficients. 

Running Example: Reconsider the KS equation P DE GT and the learned equations P DE A and 

P DE B. The values computed from the different metrics discussed in this section are reported in Table 3. They all indicate that P DE A is much closer to the ground truth than P DE B. Except for the ℓ2-based error ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα), which heavily over-penalizes local errors, all the ϵpcoef metrics behave similarly by yielding a ratio of approximately 1:7 to 1:8 in favor of P DE A. It is worth noticing that, in this example, the weighted error wϵ 2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) accounting for local sensitivity does not reveal a more pronounced difference between P DE A and P DE B. Note that we did not compute wLyap ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα)because calculating the Lyapunov exponent is known to be NP-hard in general (as is the Kolmogorov complexity [43]). Even though it can be estimated, it remains exponentially expensive for PDEs such as KS. Finally, the N DCG metric appears to better capture the difference between the two learned PDEs than the Tanimoto coefficient, for which the two spurious terms have only a limited impact because of their small associated coefficients. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ These metrics directly measure the success of coefficient recovery. Aside from wϵ 2 

> coef

and wLyap ϵ2

> coef

which require evaluating partial derivatives w.r.t. to each αi, they are simple to compute and easy to interpret. Tanimoto coefficient TG indirectly considers both the structure and the coefficient involved. 

N ϵ 1 

> coef i

is the only metric that guarantees the recovery of the structure while evaluating the coefficient errors. By leveraging a local sensitivity analysis, the weighted errors convey more information because they take into account the impact of each term on the induced dynamics. 

✘ They all require knowledge of P DE GT . Coefficient errors ϵpcoef are relevant when the structure of the identified PDE is correct otherwise there is no distinction between the coefficients of the correct terms and those of the missing or wrongly identified functions. Tanimoto coefficient TG is not able to strongly penalize PDEs containing spurious terms with small coefficients, yet likely to violate physical properties and induce large solution errors in the long term. N ϵ 1 

> coef i

can be used only if the identified structure is correct. The weighted errors have an additional complexity burden due to the computation of derivatives w.r.t. αi. Moreover, estimating the largest Lyapunov exponent in 

wLyap ϵ2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) typically requires long trajectory integrations, making it computationally expensive. Finally, a small ϵpcoef or a large N DCG do not necessarily imply sparsity. 

✔ ✘ 

12 4 Metrics independent from the ground truth analytical form 

Discovering a new physical law from data, rather than recovering a ground truth equation, corresponds to the very essence of scientific progress. This task becomes especially crucial when dealing with complex real-world phenomena which may rely on several interacting physical components making it difficult, even for experts, to derive an appropriate mathematical model. Through their expertise, scientists are sometimes able to formulate hypotheses about the presence of certain terms in the equation, without however being able to provide its complete analytical form. This kind of scenario arises in many fields, such as complex materials, biological systems, physical flows, or socio-economic dynamics. This raises the key question of how to evaluate a discovered equation when there is no GT theory or only a partial knowledge of its expression. This question still holds when P DE GT is not intended to be used in a metric directly through its symbolic form. In both cases, the direct analytical comparison between the discovered and GT equations is not possible anymore. In this more realistic setting, it is generally assumed that, in addition to the training set T , a validation set V is available, composed of nV observation or simulation data. A standard way consists in numerically solving the PDE identified from T (provided that initial and boundary conditions are known, as well as the time step δt) and in collecting a set E of nV estimated solutions ˆu(t, x). Then, it is possible to compare, most of the time from a pointwise perspective, the underlying dynamics of the latter with that of the validation data u(t, x) of V.We start this large overview with metrics based on prediction errors (Sec. 4.1), followed by a few criteria focusing solely on sparsity (Sec. 4.2). The joint evaluation prediction+sparsity is addressed in several metrics discussed in Sec. 4.3 before showing how to check the physical consistency of the learned equation in Sec 4.4, when physical properties are available. Finally, Sec. 4.5 is devoted to the assessment of the out-of-distribution generalization capability of the discovered PDE, i.e. when V and 

E are not supposed to be i.i.d. according the same distribution as T .

4.1 Prediction errors 

Metrics presented in this section primarily address Question Q1 (which concerns the prediction accuracy), and for some of them Question Q2 (which deals with the physical consistency). 

Solution error on u: The solution -mean squared error M SE (ˆ u, u ) is arguably the most widely used metric for assessing the ability of the identified equation to accurately predict the underlying physical dynamics (see, e.g. [10, 36, 44]). M SE (ˆ u, u ) evaluates how well the estimated solutions E fit in-distribution validation data V4 when both V and E have been collected at the same ( t, x) coordinates allowing pointwise comparisons: 

M SE (ˆ u, u ) = 1

nV

> nV

X

> i=1

 ˆu(ti, xi) − u(ti, xi)2 ∈ R≥0. (18) As suggested in PDE-BENCH [45] where the authors compare several PiML models (PINN [1], FNO [2], U-Net, etc.), it may be relevant to consider the scale-independent normalized version of 

M SE (ˆ u, u ) defined as follows (also used, e.g. , in ANN-PYSR [40], PITA [46] and in [47]): 

nM SE (ˆ u, u ) = 

PnV

> i=1

 ˆu(ti, xi) − u(ti, xi)2

PnV 

> i=1

u(ti, xi)2 ∈ R≥0, (19)       

> 4We assume here that the sets of validation data Vand estimated solutions Eare generated under the same physical conditions and parameter distributions as those used for generating the training data T. Out-of-distribution dynamics will be discussed later when we will address the extrapolation ability of the discovered PDE.

13 or the normalized mean absolute error ( nM AE ): 

nM AE (ˆ u, u ) = 

PnV 

> i=1

|ˆu(ti, xi) − u(ti, xi)|

PnV 

> i=1

|u(ti, xi)| ∈ R≥0. (20) Note that in a couple of PDE discovery methods, e.g. , PDE-NET [5], LLM-SRBench [28] or KeplerAgent [48], a slight modification of Eq.(19) is used by subtracting from each term of the denominator the spatial mean ¯ u of u. This allows to remove the constant spatial mode and en-sure that the metric primarily reflects the reconstruction accuracy of the non-trivial spatial structures. 

Residual error from ut: Instead of checking the prediction accuracy of the vector field solution ˆ u, the time derivatives ˆ ut can be considered and compared with ut. This amounts to evaluating the capacity of the PDE to accurately capture the local dynamics of the system, as done, e.g. , in PhysPDE [9], SINDY-PI [10], MDBENCH [12], or MIO-SINDY [23]. The residual -mean squared error is defined as follows: 

nM SE (ˆ ut, u t) = 

PnV

> i=1

 ˆut(xi) − ut(xi)2

PnV 

> i=1

ut(xi)2 ∈ R≥0. (21) 

Spectral error on F(u): In order to evaluate the learned PDE from a signal processing perspective, the prediction error in the Fourier space fM SE is computed in PDE-BENCH [45], constrained to low, middle, and high-frequency regions. This allows to quantify how well the equation reproduces the solution across different spatial scales, providing insight into whether both large-scale structures and fine-scale dynamics are accurately captured. fM SE is defined from the estimated solutions ˆ u(t, x) and validation data u(t, x) as follows: 

fM SE 

 F(ˆ u(t, . )) , F(u(t, . ))  =

Pkmax  

> kmin

|F (ˆ u(t, . )) − F (u(t, . )) |2

kmax − kmin + 1 ∈ R≥0, (22) where F is a discrete Fourier transformation, and kmin , kmax are the minimum and maximum indices in Fourier coordinates. From Eq. 22, one can compute the overall error along the trajectory as follows: 

f M SE 

 F(ˆ u), F(u) = 1

NTNTX

> i=1

fM SE 

 F(ˆ u(i ∗ δt, . )) , F(u(i ∗ δt, . ))  ∈ R≥0, (23) where, as a reminder, NT corresponds to the number of discrete temporal evaluations in [0 , T ] and δt

is the time step. Note that at time t = 0, u(0 , x) = ˆ u(0 , x) by construction. 

Pointwise error heatmaps: Beyond the previous metrics which synthesize with one scalar the prediction error of the discovered equation, most PDE discovery papers also assess visually the quality of the equation by reporting in a heatmap, at each spatio-temporal coordinate ( t, x), the corresponding pointwise solution reconstruction absolute error |ˆu(t, x) − u(t, x)| ∈ R≥0, or |ˆut − ut| ∈ R≥0 if the residual error is considered. This visualization is particularly well adapted for (1 d + t) PDEs (see Figure 3, first two panels, for the KS PDE). Another heatmap can provide valuable physical insights by reporting the pointwise MSE or MAE between the spatial Fourier transforms of the predicted and GT solutions as a function of time and spatial wavenumber. This kind of representation (as illustrated in Fig. 3, last two panels) reveals how the prediction error is distributed across spatial scales over time, indicating whether the discovered PDE accurately captures both large-scale (low-wavenumber) and fine-scale (high-wavenumber) dynamics. 14 Figure 3: Pointwise prediction absolute error between ˆ u(t, x) and u(t, x) for P DE A (1st subfigure) and P DE B (2nd), and the normalized mean absolute error nM AE , as defined in Eq.(20). On both figures is also reported the rollout error ϵtrollout (ˆ u, u ) (Eq.24) over time (dashed-lines). The 3d and 4th panels represent the pointwise M SE for P DE A and P DE B respectively, between the spatial Fourier transforms of the predicted and GT solutions as a function of time and spatial wavenumber (up to 5). The global fM SE is also reported on the two figures. 

Rollout error over time t: Even if, at first glance, two equations may appear similar (as observed with P DE A and P DE B in Fig. 2) yielding low M SE or M AE values over a limited temporal domain, it should be kept in mind that the models recursively propagate their own predictions. Initially, if the predicted trajectory may remain close to the GT, over longer rollout horizons, small initial inaccuracies accumulate and eventually may lead to significant deviations. This error accumulation cannot be well captured by pointwise metrics. To assess the stability and dynamical fidelity of the learned PDE, the rollout error ϵrollout is often used. This trajectory discrepancy involves a spatial integral at each time step leading in the discrete case to the following expression: 

ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) = 1

NTNTX

> i=1

ϵirollout (ˆ u, u ) = 1

NTNTX

> i=1

|| ˆu(i ∗ δt, . ) − u(i ∗ δt, . )|| 2 

> L2(Ω)

∈ R≥0. (24) As we will discuss later when addressing the question of generalization (see Section 4.5), ϵrollout is particularly well suited for evaluating the long-term extrapolation ability of the learned equation. Instead of summarizing this error with one scalar as defined in Eq.(24), it may be worthwhile to plot the curve representing the rollout error ϵtrollout (ˆ u, u ) over time (see Figure 3). Note that this curve is not monotonically increasing, as it represents the average error over all time steps between 0 and t.This metric has been widely studied in recent PiML articles addressing the accumulation of prediction errors when neural solvers are used as surrogate models for numerical schemes (see, e.g. ,PDE-Refiner [49], DiffusionRollout [50] or [51], to cite some of them). 

Running Example: Back to the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation. Table 4 summarizes the evaluation of P DE A and P DE B according to the prediction metrics discussed in this section. For both the solutions u and the temporal derivatives ut, all evaluation metrics consistently demonstrate that 

P DE A provides substantially more accurate estimated predictions ˆ u and ˆ ut than P DE B. This is visually confirmed by the the first two heatmaps presenting the pointwise errors on Fig. 3 which further allow to identify which parts of the dynamics lead to the the largest errors. For P DE B, interestingly, we can notice that the error pattern is strongly correlated with the shock regions of the ground truth (Fig. 2, left): while P DE B captures the overall dynamics, it exhibits larger deviations near propagating discontinuities and steep fronts, where the solution is more challenging to approximate with this erroneous equation. The heatmaps on the Fourier transforms (two last panels of Fig. 3) show that for both P DE A and P DE B, the prediction error is mainly concentrated in the lowest wavenumber modes (up to 4 for the latter), indicating that the largest discrepancies between the predicted and ground-truth spectral components occur at large spatial scales. However, the f M SE (F(ˆ u), F(u)) error is approximately one order of magnitude smaller for P DE A than for P DE B, confirming the lower quality of the latter. Finally, the curves of rollout error ϵtrollout (ˆ u, u ), reported on Fig. 3 (dashed-lines), 15 Table 4: Application of the prediction error metrics (Sec. 4.1) to compare P DE A versus P DE B using estimated solutions ˆ u from both of them and validation data u simulated from the KS ground truth equation P DE GT as reference. 

P DE A P DE B             

> ˆut=−0.99 uu xˆut=−0.89 uu x−0.9uxx
> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

M SE (ˆ u, u ) (18) 0.0371 • 0.7557 •nM SE (ˆ u, u ) (19) 0.0308 • 0.6277 •nM AE (ˆ u, u ) (20) 0.1281 • 0.6605 •nM SE (ˆ ut, u t) (21) 0.0003 • 0.0507 •f M SE (F(ˆ u), F(u)) (23) 1081.7 • 22011.1 •ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) (24) 0.8170 • 16.6252 •

show that the small initial error incurred by P DE B diverges dramatically as time passes while the error associated with P DE A remains small. This is also reflected in the overall rollout error computed at t = 50, which is twenty times larger for P DE B (0 .08170 versus 16 .6252). This running example clearly demonstrates that the graphical representations (heatmaps and rollout error curves) provide a valuable complement to quantitative metrics such as M SE , M AE ,

ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) and f M SE (F(ˆ u), F(u)). In particular, we must acknowledge that it is rather difficult to interpret the value of the latter on its own and to determine whether 1081.7 can be considered small without considering it in light of the Fourier heatmap. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ nM SE and nM AE -based metrics are scale invariant; fM SE provides insight into the capacity of the PDE to reproduce the solution across different spatial scales. Unlike the other metrics, ϵrollout (ˆ u, u )allows to evaluate the stability of the PDE over time. The pointwise error heatmap enables the identification of regions of the domain with the largest prediction errors (often in shock regions). The heatmap on the Fourier transforms reveals how errors are distributed across spatial scales over time. 

✘ Small prediction errors do not ensure sparse PDEs and physical consistency. Therefore, the sole use of these metrics does not guarantee the correct PDE has been discovered. The heatmaps cannot be used directly for multi-dimensional PDEs. 

✔ ✘ 

4.2 Sparsity 

Based on the realistic assumption that most physical dynamics are governed by PDEs involving only a few terms [52], the metrics presented in this section focus exclusively on Question Q3 , which concerns the simplicity and, hopefully, interpretability of the identified equations. The numerous metrics which aim, more interestingly, at jointly considering the simplicity and the precision will be discussed in Section 4.3 

Nonzero coefficients in ˆα: A natural metric for evaluating the PDE sparsity simply consists in counting the number of nonzero coefficients involved in the learned equation ˆ ut = ˆα⊤.Θ, while assigning an infinite score to an expression with no terms. This leads to the following score Sterms ( ˆα), used, e.g. , in [36]: 

Sterms ( ˆα) = 

( ∞ if ˆα is a zero vector, 1 − |{ ˆαi| ˆαi=0 }| |Θ| ∈ [0 , 1] otherwise. (25) 16 Table 5: Application of the sparsity metrics (Sec. 4.2) to compare P DE A versus P DE B.

P DE A P DE B             

> ˆut=−0.99 uu xˆut=−0.89 uu x−0.9uxx
> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

Sterms ( ˆα) (25) 3/5 • 1 •C( ˆα⊤.Θ) (26) 11 • 18 •

The closer Sterms is to 0, the sparser the PDE. It is worth noting that this score strongly depends on the size of the dictionary considered. Consequently, the same PDE may yield different scores depending on the number of functions available in Θ. For this reason, Sterms is more useful when comparing competing PDEs learned from the same set of terms. 

Complexity of the expression tree of ˆα⊤.Θ: Since the notion of model complexity is often directly associated with the level of sparsity, the number of nodes, constant terms, and operations in the expression tree representing the equation is frequently employed in symbolic regression during the exploration of the search space. This measure of complexity can be defined as follows: 

C( ˆα⊤.Θ) = size 



ExpT ree ( ˆα⊤.Θ) 



∈ R>0, (26) where size (.) outputs the number of elements involved in the expression tree ExpT ree of the learned equation. As done in [12], this metric can be easily computed by using the SymPy Python library. The number of nodes in the expression tree is also used as a complexity measure for evaluating equations in README [53], a framework for rapid equation discovery. Although C( ˆα⊤.Θ) allows for a valid assessment of the complexity of certain functions through the expression tree (as is the case, for example, for polynomials), note that it may be misleading if differential terms are treated as atomic symbols, as this fails to account for their differential order. Therefore, particular attention should be paid to properly representing the expressiveness associated with differential terms. 

Running Example: Table 5 shows the values obtained from P DE A and P DE B for Sterms ( ˆα) and 

C( ˆα⊤.Θ). Both capture the fact that P DE A is simpler than P DE B. On the other hand, since we have restricted the dictionary Θ, for the sake of simplicity, to a set containing only five functions, 

P DE B is considered, according to Sterms ( ˆα), as not being sparse at all. Even P DE A, which consists of only three terms, is not considered to be that sparse. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ Both Sterms ( ˆα) and C( ˆα⊤.Θ) directly measure the sparsity, and thus, evaluate the potential inter-pretability of the learned PDE. They are simple to compute and easy to interpret. 

✘ A high sparsity score ( i.e. small Sterms ( ˆα) or C( ˆα⊤.Θ)) does not guarantee a valid PDE has been discovered. Two PDEs that are equivalent up to an analytical reformulation can lead to different spar-sity scores Sterms ( ˆα) or complexities C( ˆα⊤.Θ), depending for the latter on how they are represented by the expression tree. Sterms ( ˆα) depends on the size of the dictionary Θ and thus can be overly optimistic when a lot of functions are available, or overly pessimistic otherwise, as is the case in our KS PDE illustration. If partial derivatives are considered atomic terms, neither criterion accurately reflects the actual complexity of the expression. 

✔ ✘ 

The limitations and risks associated with evaluating the quality of a PDE solely based on the number of its constituent parts have led researchers to consider the ability of the equation to accurately 17 predict the observed dynamics alongside the sparsity. This strategy has resulted in the proposal of numerous metrics based on a trade-off between the two characteristics, which are presented in the following section. 

4.3 Trade-off between prediction and sparsity 

The metrics examined in Sec. 4.1 and 4.2 were intended to capture only one aspect of the PDE evaluation. In this section, we review measures that deal with the task from a joint perspective, most of them addressing both the prediction accuracy (Question Q1 ) and sparsity issues (Question Q3 ). These different metrics differ from one another in the way they define and combine the two concepts. 

Solution error–sparsity trade-off: In [54], considering the close relationship between the expres-siveness of a PDE containing many terms and the risk of overfitting, the authors present a method for symbolic representation distillation. They suggest to select, between competing PDEs, the one which maximizes the fractional drop in nM AE on the solutions u (as defined in Eq. (20)) over the increase ∆C in complexity. The latter is evaluated as a function of the atomic elements used in the equation, 

e.g. , the size of its expression tree as in Eq. (26). To this end, given two competing equations P DE A

and P DE B, the following Score ( ˆαB| ˆαA) is computed (the larger the value, the better the evaluation in favor of P DE B): 

Score ( ˆαB| ˆαA) = −∆ log( nM AE (ˆ uA, ˆuB)) ∆C( ˆαB| ˆαA) ∈ R. (27) In [55], the authors also leverage this metric in the context of PDE discovery for modeling Alzheimer’s disease. They use Score ( ˆαB| ˆαA) for selecting the equation governing the best the underlying reaction-diffusion system. 

Residual error–sparsity trade-off: In [32], the following reward function is defined to assess the identified PDE, as a multiplicative trade-off between a sparsity term and the coefficient of determina-tion R2 on the residuals of the equation: 

Reward 1( ˆα) = (1 − c0 log 10 |S ( ˆα)|)

| {z }

> Sparsity

× 1 −

PnV

> i=1

 ut(xi) − Θ⊤ 

> i

. ˆα2

PnV 

> i=1

(ut(xi) − ¯ut)2

!| {z }  

> 1−Residual error ≈R2

∈ R>0, (28) where |S ( ˆα)| = |{ Θi : ˆαi̸ = 0 }| corresponds to the number of nonzero coefficients involved in the PDE, and c0 is a constant that governs the trade-off between simplicity and accuracy; the second term considers the residuals of the PDE that can be computed from the validation set V. The higher 

Reward 1( ˆα) is, the better is the evaluation of the identified equation ˆ ut = ˆα⊤.Θ. In the same vein, a reward function Reward 2( ˆα) is presented in [56] to evaluate the PDE from a sparsity and residuals perspective. This metric is defined as follows: 

Reward 2( ˆα) = 1 − ξ1 × |S ( ˆα)| − ξ2 × depth  ExpT ree ( ˆα⊤.Θ) 

1 + Err ( ˆα⊤.Θ) ∈ R, (29) where Err ( ˆα⊤.Θ) is defined as the error on residuals || ut − ˆα⊤.Θ|| 22, depth  ExpT ree ( ˆα⊤.Θ)  is the depth of the PDE expression tree, and ξ1 and ξ2 are two constants that control the trade-off. In NeuroSymBO [25], the authors leverage a criterion similar to Eq.(29), with ξ2 = 0 and using 

Err ( ˆα⊤.Θ) = nM SE (ˆ u, u ) as defined in Eq.(19). 18 Likelihood–sparsity trade-off: Information-theoretic criteria such as Akaike Information Criterion (AIC ) [57], Bayesian Information Criterion ( BIC ) [58], and their variants, are used to evaluate PDEs according to an accuracy/complexity trade-off. Their difference with the previously discussed metrics lies in the use of the likelihood of the dataset as a probabilistic measure of fitness that can be fur-ther employed for uncertainty estimation. For all of them, a smaller value indicates a better evaluation. Akaike Information Criterion ( AIC ) [57] is a statistical metric defined as follows: 

AIC ( ˆα) = 2 |S ( ˆα)| − 2 log( L(T , ˆα)) ∈ R, (30) where, as a reminder, |S ( ˆα)| corresponds to the number of nonzero coefficients involved in the expres-sion, and L(T , ˆα) is the log-likelihood of the data, given the considered PDE. A common likelihood function in PDE discovery is based on the residual sum of squares which amounts to calculating 

|| ut − Θ⊤. ˆα|| 22, yielding the following corrected AIC c( ˆα) for the training set T of size nT :

AIC c( ˆα) = nT log || ut − Θ⊤. ˆα|| 22

nT

+ 2 |S ( ˆα)| ∈ R. (31) In MIO-SINDY [23] and also in [59], the authors employ AIC c as model selection criterion for SINDY, especially to rank the candidate models with respect to the regularization parameter associated with the sparsity-inducing norm. Note that Eq. (31) can be employed in the same way by using the field values u instead of the time derivatives. In this case, it is necessary to consider the squared differences between the ground truth u(t, x) and simulation data ˆ u(t, x) from the identified PDE. Also an established metric, the BIC (Bayesian Information Criterion) [58], known as the Schwarz information criterion, has experienced renewed interest in model selection, particularly through recent symbolic regression models for comparing learned analytical expressions. It differs from AIC in the way it defines model complexity. While AIC solely considers the number of functions in Eq. (31), the complexity is heavier in BIC in the sense that it takes into account the size nT of the dataset T , so penalizing more and more complex models as the dataset grows. More formally, BIC is defined in our PDE evaluation setting as follows: 

BIC ( ˆα) = log (nT )|S ( ˆα)| − 2log (L(T , ˆα)) ∈ R, (32) where L(T , ˆα) can be defined in the same way as for AIC .While it is argued in [59] that BIC can be efficiently used to select the best equation inferred by SINDY, it is demonstrated in [38] that the minimization of BIC could lead to overfitted equations with unnecessary hypotheses, especially when the model is learned from an overcomplete candidate library Θ. To overcome this issue, the authors present an uncertainty-penalized Bayesian Information Criterion ( U BIC ) which penalizes the identified PDE both in terms of complexity and quantified uncertainty. The latter is estimated by using Bayesian regression to compute the coefficient of variation of the posterior PDE coefficients. Finally, a Physics-informed Information Criterion ( P IC ) is used in [11] to evaluate the quality of a learned PDE. P IC takes the following form: 

P IC ( ˆα) = Lr( ˆα) × Lp( ˆα) ∈ R, (33) where Lr is a redundancy loss measuring the parsimony of the PDE and Lp is a physical loss evaluating its precision. Using a moving horizon technique, Lr represents the coefficient of variation 19 CV of the learned parameters over different moving horizons, under the realistic assumption that correct dominant terms are stable with small CV . Lp measures the errors of a PINN optimized using the learned PDE as a ground truth. The authors show evidence that P IC performs better than BIC and AIC in the presence of high noise. However, this improvement should be consid-ered in light of the additional computational burden associated with training (i) a neural surrogate to generate smoothed meta-data and calculate derivatives and (ii) a PINN to evaluate the physical loss. 

Kolmogorov complexity of Θ⊤ ˆα: Minimum Description Length principle [60] ( M DL ) is closely related to AIC and BIC , but it is based on a distinct information-theoretic principle. M DL posits that the best representation of a dataset T is the one that compresses T most (leading to the so-called Kolmogorov complexity), using symbols from a finite alphabet. In this context, the presence of any regularity in T , as is often observed in physical dynamical systems, can be leveraged to compress the data through derivative terms. A model is preferred over another if it leads to the shortest description length, achieving the best trade-off between simplicity and predictive accuracy. As far as we know, MDL , used as a criterion for discovering mathematical expressions, has been applied in symbolic regression primarily on equations without spatial derivative terms. The main reason is that its direct application to PDEs is non-trivial due to the additional complexity induced by differential operators, which cannot be properly assessed simply by counting the number of terms in the equation or the number of nodes in its expression tree. Nevertheless, allowing accuracy and complexity to be directly traded-off, MDL principle has been leveraged in [61] for selecting ODE candidate representations lying on the Pareto front. Since the Kolmogorov complexity associated to 

MDL has been shown to be incomputable [62], in MDLformer [63], the authors suggest to learn a neural network which enables a robust estimation. In AI-Feynman [64], MDL is also employed for selecting the winning function among symbolic regression candidates. Recast in our setting, this criterion is defined as follows: 

M DL F ey ( ˆα) = log 2 N ( ˆα) + λ log 2



max 



1, ϵrr ( ˆα)

ϵd

 

∈ R, (34) where ϵrr ( ˆα) is a fitting error of Θ ⊤ ˆα (e.g. M SE , M AE ), ϵd is a normalization constant, and N ( ˆα)is the rank of the equation size on the list of all candidates compared. In SymLang [65], a MDL -regularized Bayesian model selection is presented based on the following 

MDL score: 

M DL Sym ( ˆα) = − log p



T | e(Θ ⊤ ˆα)



+ λlen 



ExpT ree (Θ ⊤ ˆα)



∈ R, (35) where λ is a trade-off hyperparameter, and the description length len  ExpT ree (Θ ⊤ ˆα) counts the cost of encoding the expression tree ExpT ree (Θ ⊤ ˆα) of the equation and its constants. This function is defined as follows: len  ExpT ree (Θ ⊤ ˆα) = P 

> v∈nodes (e)

log 2 |O v| + |Θ|. log 2(cmax /ϵ ), where |O v| is the local branching factor at node v, and cmax and ϵ are constant range and precision. The authors point out that this criterion is related to BIC (32) and AIC (30) but, unlike them, they stress the fact that the structural complexity is better measured in M DL Sym ( ˆα) by tree description length than parameter count alone. 

Running Example: Table 6 presents the results obtained from P DE A and P DE B on our running example with the metrics that consider the trade-off between accuracy and sparsity. Since several of them require specifying hyperparameter values, we used the ones reported in the original papers introducing these metrics. Following their experimental setups, we used: c0 = 0 .2 in Reward 1( ˆα)[32]; ξ1 = 0 .01 and ξ2 = 0 .0001 in Reward 2( ˆα) [56]; ϵrr is defined as the M SE , N = 1, ϵd = 10 −15 ,

λ = n1/2 

> V

in M DL F ey ( ˆα) [64]; cmax = 10, ϵ = 10 −6, λ = 0 .1 in M DL Sym ( ˆα) [65]. As visually 20 Table 6: Application of the accuracy-sparsity metrics (Sec. 4.3) to compare P DE A versus P DE B

using validation data V simulated from the KS ground truth P DE GT as reference. Note that N/A means “ Not Applicable ” because Score is conditional on the increase in complexity (in our case from 

P DE A to P DE B) and not the other way around. 

P DE A P DE B             

> ˆut=−0.99 uu xˆut=−0.89 uu x−0.9uxx
> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

Score ( ˆαB| ˆαA) (27) N/A -0.2343 

Reward 1( ˆα) (28) 0.9043 • 0.8166 •Reward 2( ˆα) (29) 0.0306 • 0.0002 •AIC c( ˆα) (31) −1.1E+07 • −5.4E+06 •BIC ( ˆα) (32) −1.1E+07 • −5.4E+06 •M DL F ey ( ˆα) (34) 35234.7 • 42738.1 •M DL Sym ( ˆα) (35) −5.3E-06 • −2.7E-06 •

highlighted by the green dots in the table, all metrics are able to identify P DE A as the best equation. Nevertheless, some differences can be observed in the gap between the two PDEs. In particular, Reward 2( ˆα) and M DL Sym ( ˆα) seem to better capture the expected large difference in quality between P DE A and P DE B, thanks to the presence of the size of the expression tree in the complexity formulae. The other metrics tend to smooth out this difference due to the use of the number of functions involved in the equations. Regarding AIC and BIC , the experiments on the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky data reveal a particular behavior of these two information criteria. By construction, the likelihood term in both metrics rapidly outweighs the complexity penalty as the number of data points increases. Because this experiment comprises 1,064,000 data points, the AIC 

and BIC values for P DE A and P DE B mainly reflect the predictive performance of the equations rather than their sparsity. The latter is hidden behind the massive numbers obtained from the likelihood. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ All these metrics have the advantage of combining two desirable properties of a good PDE: accuracy and simplicity. They reduce equation evaluation to a single number, making it easy to rank competing equations. The size of the expression tree seems to be more relevant for measuring complexity than simply counting the number of terms in the equation. P IC further takes into account information about the residuals of the learned equation. 

✘ Tuning hyperparameters is required for the evaluation of Reward 1, Reward 2, M DL F ey and 

M DL Sym . Reward 1, AIC , BIC , and PIC use the number of terms in the equation as a measure of simplicity. This is valid for PDEs composed of functions with similar structural complexity. By construction, the likelihood term in both AIC and BIC quickly overwhelms the effect of the com-plexity penalty as the sample size increases. Finally, P IC comes with an additional computational burden (learning of two neural networks). 

✔ ✘ 

4.4 Physical consistency 

Although difficult to implement due to its dependence on prior knowledge that is not always available, verifying that the discovered equation does not violate important physical properties is crucial in PDE evaluation. In particular, checking physical consistency makes it possible to avoid overstating 21 the validity of a supposedly new law. Indeed, a low reconstruction error associated with a sparse expression does not guarantee that the identified PDE represents a plausible physical theory. In this section, we discuss various ways of verifying that certain physical constraints are satisfied, thereby addressing Question Q2 .

Consistency checking through small residuals: A widely used strategy in PiML to assess the physical consistency of a model consists in verifying the PDE residuals are low. For instance, in PINNs [1], this means that the dynamics optimized during training is consistent with the physics modeled by the known PDE . The situation is substantially different in post-hoc evaluation. In particular, observing small residuals offers weaker physical guarantees when the analytical expression P DE GT is either unavailable or intentionally not used . In this case, a small residual error (as defined in Eq. (21)) on validation data V only indicates the absence of overfitting through a compatibility with the learned differential operator ˆN [u]. But it does not ensure that the discovered PDE is the true governing law of the system. To illustrate the risk of over-interpreting low residuals, Fig. 4 reports in 3D the solutions of both the Kuramoto-Sivashinski equation ( P DE GT on the left) and of a PDE that would satisfy the initial/boundary conditions and return 0 everywhere else (right). Although such a hypothetical PDE does not satisfy the n-times differentiability requirement of a valid n-order PDE, it can still be learned by a PiML algorithm, if no precautions are taken. We can see that this PDE leads to zero residuals while completely missing the true physical dynamics. Note that this problem has been addressed from both optimization and statistical generalization perspectives in [15] when dealing with PINNs. 

Consistency checking through explicit physical properties: Beyond analyzing the residuals, one can also leverage different types of physical properties for evaluating the validity of a PDE. As discussed later in Sec. 5, depending on the domain of study and the level of expertise available, these properties can be either (i) a priori known, (ii) assumed to hold or (iii) learned from data . They can be expressed through various types of constraints to be satisfied, such as symmetries, conservation laws, dimensional consistency , etc. Among them, symmetries play a key role as they correspond to a fundamental principle in physical systems, defining their invariance under transformations such as translations, rotations, and scaling. For this reason, symmetries, which are present in many datasets, have become an important algo-rithmic and theoretical object of study in the machine learning community (see, e.g. [66, 67]). Their incorporation into PiML processes has concerned the optimization of neural PDE surrogate solvers [68, 69, 70], as well as the discovery of equations from data [44, 64, 65, 71]. Regarding this last research direction, the use of symmetries in symbolic regression allowed to drastically reduce the number of candidate expression trees by pruning the hypothesis space before search. This can therefore prevent the discovery of inconsistent PDEs that may appear relevant at first glance if one considers only prediction errors and sparsity criteria. Respecting conservation laws is also crucial in PDE discovery, as it improves the physical plausi-bility of the identified equation. In ProbConserv [72], a general framework is presented for satisfying conservation laws in equation discovery from the finite volume perspective. The authors address this task by combining the integral form (rather than its differential form) of the conservation laws with a Bayesian update. In [73], the authors present PINN-Proj , a PINN-based model which leverages a new projection method to satisfy conservation laws. Experimental results are reported showing that 

PINN-Proj outperforms a classic PINN thanks to this physical consistency requirement. Additionally, checking the dimensional consistency can be also of great help to filter out invalid models. This strategy has been efficiently used in the DHC-GEP method [74] for discovering gov-erning equations in gene expression programming. In [75], the authors use attribute grammars to ensure the dimensional consistency of the discovered equations and demonstrate their effectiveness on Feynman benchmarks. Note that, although dimensional consistency is generally considered as a hard 22 Figure 4: Possible pitfall of over-interpreting small residuals: 3D solutions of the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation P DE GT (left) and solutions simulated from a learned equation that would satisfy the initial/boundary conditions and return 0 everywhere else (right), leading thus to zero residuals. (binary) constraint, some equation discovery algorithms employ it through a regularization term, only penalizing candidates that do not satisfy it. This is the case for NEXUS [76], built on graph-based equation representation, evolutionary optimization, and adaptive reinforcement learning and where the dimensional consistency for a candidate equation ˆ ut = Θ ⊤ ˆα is defined, using our notations, as follows: 

D



Θ⊤ ˆα



= X

> t∈T

(Θ⊤ ˆα)log 

 [t][ut]



, (36) where [ t] denotes the dimension of sub-expression t, [ ut] is the target dimension and T  Θ⊤ ˆα is the set of all sub-expressions in Θ ⊤ ˆα.It is important to emphasize that the approaches described above primarily fall within the PDE discovery setting. They therefore focus on enforcing physical constraints embedded in the optimization process or used, as in symbolic regression, to select the most consistent models along the Pareto front. Nevertheless, we argue that these very same physical properties (symmetries, conservation laws, dimensional consistency, etc.) can also be exploited to evaluate a posteriori learned PDEs, although they are surprisingly often overlooked in the post-hoc evaluation literature. In this setting, they will complement certain physical properties that may be assumed to hold for the physical system under study ( e.g. convection, diffusion, advection, etc.) or other consistency-based metrics that are derived from numerical analysis, such as forward–backward verification, mesh refinement study, temporal convergence , as presented in the following. Below we attempt to categorize the main physical properties that can be checked post-hoc according to the difficulty of their assessment. 1. Inspection of the structural form of the PDE : Some structural properties can be evaluated by examining the symbolic expression of the equation. Here are a few simple examples intended to facilitate non-specialist reader’s understanding: (i) if the underlying physical process is known to be dissipative (as in heat conduction, viscous fluid flows, damped mechanical systems, etc.), one would therefore expect the term −∇ · (c∇u) to appear in the PDE; (ii) if we are studying systems related to atmospheric circulation, ocean currents, or heat transport in fluids, the con-vection term ∇ · (cu) should be present; (iii) as a third illustration, self-advection , which occurs when a field transports itself, as in fluid dynamics, implies that the term ( u · ∇ )u should appear in the symbolic expression. Even though identifying diffusion, convection, or advection mecha-nisms solely from the structure of a PDE can provide useful physical insights, note that it does 23 not guarantee that the corresponding physical properties are actually satisfied by the model. The verification generally requires more advanced analytical manipulations, such as deriving conservation laws or energy estimates (see next point 2. ). Other properties can be assessed by inspecting the form of the PDE. This is the case of spatial and temporal symmetries that can be verified if there is no term of the form xF (u) or tF(u). On the other hand, while often difficult to enforce during the identification process, dimensional consistency is much easier to check a posteriori by simply inspecting each term of the equation. 2. Analytical derivation from the PDE: Many properties, including conservation laws, posi-tivity preservation, energy dissipation , and certain invariances require symbolic manipulation of the equation. For instance, checking for conservation laws consists in determining whether the PDE can be rewritten in conservative form, ut + ∇ · F = S, by identifying a flux function F,and a source term S. As an example, for reaction–diffusion PDEs, the mass conservation law is not generally expected to hold, while this is required for Navier–Stokes PDEs which describe the motion of viscous fluids. On the other hand, positivity preservation is generally harder to assess than conservation laws, as it is not solely determined by the structure of the PDE but depends on the global properties of the associated evolution operator. One possibility is to resort to the 

maximum principle [77] according to which if the solution of the PDE were to become nega-tive, it would attain a first negative minimum, contradicting the maximum principle. Hence, any solution associated with non-negative initial data remains non-negative for all times in its interval of existence. Note that this analytical verification is limited to elliptic and parabolic PDEs. Verifying energy dissipation is also a non-trivial task in general: it requires deriving an appropriate energy law and proving analytically that the associated energy decreases over time, which may be difficult for complex nonlinear models. 3. Simulation-based verification: Because a PDE is meant to model dynamics leading to a solution u(t, x), well-posedness and uniqueness are also desirable properties when assessing the quality of a learned PDE. However, these structural properties, which generally require advanced mathematical analysis, are often difficult to establish rigorously. A practical solution is to leverage simulations (provided the initial/boundary conditions are known) and manipulating data instead of analytical equations to evaluate a property. For instance, by performing a 

convergence study , i.e. by refining the spatial mesh or time step, and checking if the solution 

u(x, t ) converges, we can evaluate the risk of instability or ill-posedness of the learned PDE (see Sec. 4.5 for more details). When priors are available about the reversibility [78] of the physical phenomenon, an inverse reconstruction procedure can be performed consisting of simulating the learned PDE forward in time and then integrating backward from the predicted final state 

u(T, x) to assess whether the initial conditions are recovered or not. For example, if the model is assumed to describe a dissipative system ( e.g. reaction-diffusion, Navier–Stokes PDEs), the reconstruction of the initial conditions is not expected to hold. On the other hand, to verify some physical invariance , it suffices to apply the considered transformation to the PDE, then solve the equation (provided that it is numerically possible) and compare the resulting solutions with the original ones. The validation of the invariance can then be done (up to numerical errors and the choice of a decision threshold) using standard metrics such as those discussed so far ( e.g. , M SE ,

M AE , etc.). Note that other properties such as the preservation of pattern formation , can also be assessed visually from simulations (this is the case of the Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation), particularly in the case of (1 d + t) PDEs. Let us conclude this section with a real-world illustration of how physical properties can be used for evaluating a PDE. The considered applied setting is surface engineering, and more specifically self-organization of matter induced by laser–matter interaction, for which the Kuramoto–Sivashinsky PDE is a candidate to (partially) model this complex phenomenon. Therefore, through this example, 24 Figure 5: Subset of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of surfaces irradiated by a femto-second laser with cross-polarized double pulses, varying the number of double pulses between 0 and 50, when the laser fluence= 0 .25 J/ cm 2 and the delay is 36ps (between the two laser pulses) [79]. Even without expertise, the visual inspection reveals that spatial invariance and the growth of structures should be reflected in the discovered PDE. we remain within the scope of our running example. 

Running Example: In laser–matter interaction, a femtosecond laser is typically employed to texture the surface of a matter and endow it with specific physical features ( e.g. , wettability, hydrophobicity, antibacterial properties, etc.). The observed dynamics (see, e.g. , SEM images on Fig. 5 used in [79]), together with the prior knowledge that this type of physical system leads to pattern formation, makes it possible to establish a number of properties that a learned PDE should satisfy. Without assuming that the KS equation is a possible candidate for modeling this phenomenon, one may reasonably expect the discovered PDE to be spatially symmetric under translations, to possess both linear (for diffusion or anti-diffusion) and nonlinear terms (saturation of instabilities, generation of chaos), and to be dissipative. These properties can thus be checked post-hoc to assess the physical consistency of the learned PDE. As a toy example, let us consider the following discovered equation: ˆut = −1.0uu x − 1.0uxx −

1.0uxxxx + 1 .0xu which is very close to P DE GT . We can observe that: (i) uu x seems relevant because it represents the self-advection of the field and is responsible for nonlinear distortion (non linear patterns); (ii) similarly, uxx plays the role of a destabilizing term that allows the growth of structures; (iii) uxxxx makes sense because it confirms the dissipative nature of the system and prevents blow-up by stabilizing small scales which is key in pattern formation; (iv) Finally, xu assumes that pattern formation is spatially dependent which is not consistent with the observed dynamics. In conclusion, without additional calculations or simulations, provided some background expertise, we can state by simply inspecting its structural form that this learned equation is not a physically plausible law because of the spurious last term. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ Well-founded physics-informed approach to PDE evaluation. Help detect physical inconsistency even when prediction errors are small and the PDE is sparse. 

✘ Require prior knowledge of the physical properties to be verified. Some properties may be difficult or impossible to formally verify. 

✔ ✘ 

4.5 Out-of-distribution generalization 

As in classic statistical learning, the ability of a PDE, optimized from a set of data T , to accurately predict unseen states within the training conditions does not imply that this equation is the governing one. Indeed, even an incorrect PDE may accurately predict the system’s evolution over short time horizons, while failing to capture the true governing dynamics. As a result, reconstruction errors 25 remain small, and the evaluation metrics discussed so far and computed on an in-distribution validation set V may lead to an overly optimistic assessment of the model’s quality. This is why Question Q4 

concerns the capacity of a discovered PDE to generalize out-of-distribution (OOD). OOD generalization can be evaluated through several experimental settings that probe the robustness and stability of an equation beyond the conditions used for its identification. Common scenarios encountered in PDE discovery include the generalization to unseen initial conditions (IC) ,

unseen boundary conditions (BC) or longer prediction horizons . Other settings, such that parameter values outside the training range or varying dynamical regimes can be considered but they are less applicable when dealing with post-hoc evaluation. Indeed, regarding the former, it is less meaningful to modify a posteriori a learned coefficient associated with a derivative term. 

Varying initial and boundary conditions: Performing experiments under changing IC and BC provides insight into whether the discovered PDE captures the underlying physical law rather than merely fitting the observed data distribution. In real world situations, where the governing P DE GT 

is unknown or only partially characterized, assessing the OOD generalization capacity is generally more difficult because it requires either additional observation data obtained from varying conditions or a learned (neural) operator allowing the generation of OOD trajectories from different IC and BC (see Sec. 5 for a more in-depth discussion). When P DE GT is known, evaluating OOD generalization capabilities is relatively straightforward, since the governing law can be used at will to generate simulation data under changing IC and BC. The following evaluation protocol can then be applied. Let us consider an equation P DE T learned from the training set T generated with the following IC and BC respectively: 

u(0 , x) ∼ D ic  

> T

, ∀x ∈ Ω

u(t, 0) , u (t, L ) ∼ D bc  

> T

, ∀t ∈ [0 , T ]where the spatial domain is supposed to be: Ω = [0 , L ].

1. Generation of two sets of nV OOD validation data from P DE GT :

• Simulate a set Vic with u(0 , x) ∼ D ic 

> OOD

, where Dic 

> OOD

̸ = Dic  

> T

(e.g. Gaussian, Sinusoidal, random Fourier modes, parametric, etc.). 

• Simulate a set Vbc with u(t, 0) and u(t, L ) ∼ D bc  

> OOD

by selecting one of the following bound-ary condition distributions (different from Dbc  

> T

): 

– Dirichlet : solutions are directly imposed at the boundary; 

– Neumann : values of the derivative are imposed; 

– Robin : combination of both; 

– Periodic : derivatives must match at opposite boundaries; 

– others. 2. Generation of two sets of nV OOD estimated solutions from P DE T : : 

• Simulate a set Eic with u(0 , x) ∼ D ic 

> OOD

.

• Simulate a set Ebc with u(t, 0) and u(t, L ) ∼ D bc 

> OOD

.It is important to note that to allow pointwise or trajectory comparisons, Vic (resp. Vbc ) and Eic 

(resp. Ebc ) are simulated at the same ( t, x) coordinates. 3. Compare Vic (resp. Vbc ) with Eic (resp. Ebc ) and evaluate whether P DE T still accurately captures the underlying governing law P DE GT under varying conditions. This evaluation can be performed using primarily metrics presented in Sec. 4.1. 26 Figure 6: Simulation data obtained from the GT KS equation P DE GT , P DE A and P DE B with two initial conditions different from those used in the running example: (left) IC 2 = sin(2 πx/L ) + 0.3 sin(6 πx/L + 0 .5); (right): IC 3 = cos(6 πx/L ) + 0 .2 cos(10 πx/L + 0 .7). We can note that changing the IC while keeping the same analytical expression leads to very different pattern formations. Note that the previously described protocol is similar to the one used in PhysPDE [9] where the authors change the boundary conditions and evaluate their model’s OOD generalization capacity through the mean squared residuals. 

Long-horizon prediction: The temporal generalization is also widely employed as an OOD scenario. Instead of evaluating the learned PDE on unseen IC and BC, P DE T is simply assessed over longer horizons than those used during the discovery process. In this case, one can resort to the rollout error 

ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) (already defined in Eq. 24) which is particularly well suited for evaluating the long-term stability of P DE T (as used, e.g. , in AutoSINDy [80]). We remind below its definition: 

ϵT ′

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) = 1

N ′ 

> TN′
> T

X

> i=1

ϵirollout (ˆ u, u ) = 1

N ′ 

> TN′
> T

X

> i=1

|| ˆu(i ∗ δt, . ) − u(i ∗ δt, . )|| 2 

> L2(Ω)

∈ R≥0, (37) where N ′ 

> T

is supposed here much higher than the number of temporal steps NT used for learning 

P DE T .

Numerical OOD generalization: To conclude this section, we mention in the following an approach borrowed from numerical analysis [81] to investigate the generalization ability of the discovered PDE through the lens of a convergence study, which can be viewed as a form of numerical distribution shift evaluation. The principle consists in assessing the mesh convergence by numerically solving the equation at different spatial resolutions. More formally, the following property is expected to hold: 

Conv x( ˆα) = 0 , (38) where Conv x( ˆα) = lim δx→0 || ˆu − ˆuδx || . Eq. (38) means that as the spatial discretization is progres-sively refined, the numerical solution converges to a stable limit. This approach can therefore reveal pathological behaviors and help identify PDEs exhibiting low numerical robustness and potential ill-posedness. Note that the convergence analysis can be equally applied to the temporal discretization, leading to: 

Conv t( ˆα) = lim  

> δt→0

|| ˆu − ˆuδt || . (39) 

Running Example: The OOD generalization capacity of P DE A and P DE B in different scenarios is reported in Table 7. Through the different changes of initial conditions, we can note that P DE B,because of its erroneous form, is not always able to accurately extrapolate. The most striking illustration is given by IC 3 for which the M AE increases significantly (0.898). This deteriorated behavior is confirmed by the simulation data presented in Fig. 6 (last panel). We can see that IC 3prevents the pattern formation process with P DE B. By evaluating the individual terms of this PDE, we noticed that uxxxx becomes too small to play the expected role in the formation of non linear 27 Table 7: Capacity of out-of-distribution generalization of P DE A and P DE B in three scenarios: (i) varying initial conditions IC. The M AE is used as evaluation metric. Note that IC 1 corresponds to the conditions of the running example; (ii) longer horizons at different times T ≥ 50. The rollout error is evaluated at time 50 , 100 , 200 and 300; (iii) mesh and time convergence. 

P DE A P DE B

OOD scenarios ˆut = −0.99 uu x ˆut = −0.89 uu x − 0.9uxx       

> −0.98 uxx −0.985 uxxxx −0.85 uxxxx + 0 .0004 u−0.0008 uxuxx

IC 1 = cos(2 πx/L ) + 0 .5 cos(4 πx/L + 0 .3) 0.128 • 0.661 •IC 2 = sin(2 πx/L ) + 0 .3 sin(6 πx/L + 0 .5) 0.126 • 0.572 •IC 3 = cos(6 πx/L ) + 0 .2 cos(10 πx/L + 0 .7) 0.052 • 0.898 •ϵT ′=50 

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) 0.817 • 16.6 •ϵT ′=100  

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) 14.1 • 38.8 •ϵT ′=200  

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) 36.8 • 55.4 •ϵT ′=300  

> rollout

(ˆ u, u ) 48.3 • 61.1 •Conv x( ˆα) 0 • 0 •Conv t( ˆα) 0 • 0 •

patterns. The analysis of the rollout-errors is also very informative. While we already noted that 

P DE A leads to a much smaller ϵrollout (ˆ u, u ) in the training time interval [0 , T ] (Fig. 3), the gap between the two PDEs tends to narrow as the time horizon is extended (shifting from a ratio of 20-to-1 to 1.3-to-1). This is confirmed by the simulations of P DE GT , P DE A and P DE B between [0 , 300] presented in Fig. 7. Although P DE A appears to be visually much closer to P DE GT than 

P DE B, with similar patterns still clearly visible after t = 50, the rollout error (dashed line) reveals that P DE A also deteriorates rapidly, eventually reaching nearly the same error level as P DE B

at T = 300. This example clearly illustrates how even small discrepancies in the analytical form of a PDE can lead to dramatic errors in extrapolation. In particular, although P DE A contains the correct terms and its coefficients are very close to those of P DE GT , these seemingly minor differences are sufficient to cause a substantial degradation in long-term predictions. We can therefore conclude that the rollout error should play a crucial role in PDE evaluation, which is far from being the case in papers on the subject. Finally, regarding Conv x( ˆα) and Conv t( ˆα), the numerical convergence of both P DE A and P DE B (in time and space) is satisfied, which is a good point from an evaluation perspective, but it does not allow us to distinguish between the two equations. 

PROS ✔ vs CONS ✘✔ Simulating the learned PDE with varying IC and over longer time horizons is very informative about the robustness of the equation to OOD. 

✘ Performing OOD experiments requires either the ground truth P DE GT to be known or access to additional OOD observation data which is not always possible in real-applications. 

✔ ✘ 

# 5 Practical guidelines for evaluating PDEs and perspectives 

The in-depth analysis conducted in this paper from the extensive literature on equation evaluation, spanning machine learning, information theory, symbolic regression, and numerical analysis, reveals that a universally accepted methodology for a systematic evaluation remains elusive. To help the research community working on this topic move toward a standardized process, and avoid 28 Figure 7: Long-horizon simulations ( T ∈ [0 , 300]) of the Kuramoto-Sivashinsk GT P DE GT (left), 

P DE A (center) and P DE B (right). The rollout error ϵtrollout (ˆ u, u ) over time (dashed-lines) is also reported. overstatements regarding the validity of a discovered PDE, we formulate in this section practical guidelines based on the findings presented in this survey. We finish the paper by proposing some promising research directions in this area, which we consider to be still in its early stages. 

Discover or Recover? That’s the question: If one aims at evaluating a novel PDE learning algorithm rather than discovering genuinely a new theory, it is recommended, as widely done in the literature, to employ benchmark equations for which the complete ground truth is known, including the analytical form P DE GT , the parameter values as well as the associated initial and boundary conditions. In this setting, assuming access to this prior makes it possible, as a proof-of-concept, to assess the algorithm’s ability to accurately recover the governing law P DE GT . Evaluation can then be carried out using the different metrics described in Section 3. In light of our analysis and the results obtained on the Kuramoto-Sivanshinsky PDE, we particularly recommend using T P R (α, ˆα)(4), wϵ 2 

> coef

(α, ˆα) (12) and N DCG (α, ˆα) 14. When P DE GT is not perfectly recovered, it becomes crucial to assess the impact of a spurious term or a coefficient deviation. Claiming that the PDE is “ well recovered ” on the basis of its similarity to P DE GT , without measuring the consequences of even small differences cannot be considered a scientifically valid approach. However, based solely on metrics of Section 3, a number of papers conclude their experiments by typically stating: “ Our novel algorithm A outperforms method B because the symbolic shape and coefficients of the PDE identified with A are more similar to P DE GT than that of competitor B. ”” We have emphasized in our study that the presence of small errors in the coefficients associated with certain terms, or the erroneous inclusion of an irrelevant function, can have dramatic consequences on the modeled dynamics. The Kuramoto–Sivashinsky PDE provides a good illustration of this behavior, with terms that have a nonlinear effect and slight changes in their coefficients can drive the system from a quasi-stationary regime to a chaotic one. To address this issue, a common strategy is to employ in-distribution validation data simulated from P DE GT , and compare them with solutions simulated from the identified PDE by resorting to trajectory or pointwise errors-based metrics such as M SE (19), M AE (20) and their variants (see Sec. 4.1). Leveraging these metrics often makes it possible to capture this type of pathological behaviors by checking the local consistency of the learned equation. While this protocol based on so-called interpolation is appropriate when the goal is to recover a GT law , we argue that such in-distribution generalization is necessary but not sufficient when it comes to evaluating a PDE as a new scientific discovery. This more realistic situation arises when 

P DE GT is assumed to be unknown and the goal is to discover it as a new knowledge from observation data. To understand the specificity of this setting, it is essential to recall the distinction between interpolation and extrapolation , two well-known concepts in machine learning that play a key role in this knowledge discovery framework. 29 Interpolation or Extrapolation? Get the best of both worlds! In PDE discovery, to avoid overstating the validity of a discovered PDE, as a general new physical law, on the sole basis of low errors on in-distribution data, it becomes crucial to also evaluate its extrapolation capability on out-of-distribution examples. As seen in Sec. 4.5, extrapolation provides a more stringent criterion by testing whether the learned equation captures the underlying dynamics beyond the regime seen during its identification. Thus, interpolation and extrapolation play complementary roles in post-hoc evaluation, each yielding different insights into the quality of the discovered PDE. Interpolation ensures local consistency , verifying that the inferred dynamics is coherent in observed regimes. On the other hand, extrapolation provides a stronger indicator of whether the PDE captures true physical structure rather than statistical regularities 5. In this context, we discussed in Sec. 4.5 different scenarios for evaluating the OOD generalization capacity of a discovered PDE. Based on our analysis and the experiments conducted, we strongly advocate the use of varying initial and boundary conditions and the rollout-error 37 to evaluate the stability of the equation. The running example with P DE A clearly illustrated that, despite having an equation very close to P DE GT , errors can accumulate over the long term and lead to substantial divergence in the predictions. Paradoxically, while real-world applications have a pressing need for extrapolation to validate sci-entific discovery, they often suffer from a lack of observation data (compared to the unlimited number of simulations available when P DE GT is known), preventing the straightforward implementation of the experimental setup described in Sec. 4.5. To overcome this issue, different solutions exist, one of them consisting in learning a surrogate model allowing to generate data under new conditions. For instance, Fourier Neural Operator [2], which models mappings between function spaces, can be used as a surrogate numerical solver. Once trained on in-distribution data, it can generalize by outputting solution trajectories for new conditions, thereby providing a practical way to construct controlled OOD scenarios. However, it should be noted that, in addition to numerical errors associated with trajectories simulated from the learned PDE, extrapolation may also be impacted by approximation and generalization errors of the FNO, which are respectively related to the model architecture and the amount of data available for training. 

To know or not to know a priori? In Section 4.4, we showed how physical properties can be leveraged to complement, when validating the physical consistency of a PDE, metrics based on pointwise/trajectory errors and sparsity criteria. However, such strategy raises the key question of the access to physical priors about the characteristics that the discovered equation is expected to satisfy, such as conserved quantities or symmetries. The review of the PDE discovery literature reveals that a number of papers that employ inductive bias derived from physical laws often rely on the assumption that these properties are known in advance. This is the case, e.g. , in [44] where symmetry is enforced by using differential invariants of the symmetry group as the variable set, hypothesizing this group is already given. In [71], the authors incorporate a priori known Lie symmetries to enhance Gaussian Processes-based models both in the context of forward and inverse problems (for learning unknown PDE parameters). In the same vein, in [82], Lie symmetries are supposed to be known and are embedded into the loss function of PINNs to solve inverse problems. Assuming that such physical characteristics are given remains reasonable provided that one has some background knowledge on the class of physical dynamical systems for which the PDE discovery is being performed. In [44], the authors argue that physicists themselves often operate in this manner, hypothesizing the symmetries of a system before seeking governing equations allowed by those invariances. We illustrated this way of proceeding using the case of laser–matter interaction in the “Running Example” paragraph of Section 4.4. However, for many real-world situations, this postulate becomes less tenable because of a lack of reliable prior knowledge about   

> 5Note that when the objective is merely to recover a known PDE, extrapolation can still serve as a robustness check, but it is not strictly necessary for confirming correctness, since P DE GT is already fully specified.

30 the underlying physical structure, making it difficult to impose physical constraints on a learned PDE. This can happen, e.g. , in socio-economic systems, where interactions are heterogeneous, in biology, where mechanisms are only partially understood and vary across scales, or in surface engineering involving the complex intertwining of several phenomena. To circumvent this limitation, recent works aimed to automatically discover physical properties from data and leverage them for PDE discovery/evaluation. For example, in [83], the authors propose LaLiGAN , a novel generative model which can discover symmetries of nonlinear group actions. They show that their method can be applied to downstream tasks such as equation discovery. On the other hand, in [84] and [85], to avoid hard-coding symmetries in neural networks, the authors aim to discover Lie group symmetry transformations present in the training dataset. The reader interested in learning more about symmetry discovery may also refer to [64, 67, 86, 87, 88]. Similarly, note that several recent papers have investigated the discovery of conservation laws from data (see, e.g. , [89, 90]). 

And what next? While some of the metrics discussed in this paper possess more desirable characteristics than others, notably by providing better coverage of the key requirements that a discovered PDE is expected to satisfy (see Table 1), it is worthwhile mentioning that the most relevant ones are strongly grounded in a pointwise perspective. This applies to all metrics based on prediction errors, residuals, and trajectory-based evaluations of Sec. 4. A common consequence of these measures is that they provide only a partial assessment of the PDE quality, as they do not capture higher-level functional properties beyond local discrepancies and trajectory matching. We argue that more holistic evaluation metrics are therefore needed to assess PDE fidelity by accounting not only for local approximation errors but also for the structural, geometric, and regularity properties of the solution. We sketch below two perspectives, among other potential ones, which are likely to address this need. They rely on the use of (i) the Sobolev semi-norm and (ii) the optimal transport and gradient flows. On the other hand, leveraging [18], we also analyze the necessity to develop new metrics related to the solvability of the identified PDE. Indeed, an equation, even if correct, has little utility if no solver is available, or if the simulation time is not reasonable. Finally, we present a last promising line of research on the evaluation of fractional PDEs, which, although richer than classic equations, raise numerical challenges and require a specific assessment to be of practical interest. 

▶ Functional analysis of PDEs: The Sobolev semi-norm of a function takes into account not only the values of the function itself but also its derivatives up to a given order k, providing insights into its regularity and smoothness. Fundamentally rooted in functional analysis, it is defined as follows: 

|u|Hk (Ω) =

 X

> |β|≤ k

∥Dβ u∥2

> L2(Ω)



> 1/2

(40) where Dβ u = ∂|β|u∂xβ11 ··· ∂xβdd

, with β = ( β1, β 2, . . . , β d) ∈ Nd is a multi-index and |β| = β1 + · · · + βd.This norm has been used for a long time in numerical analysis, notably to analyze the convergence, stability and approximation quality of numerical solutions to PDES [81], and more recently in PiML models for regularizing PINNs [15] allowing to theoretically maintain consistency with the underlying physics. Surprisingly, while it enables better capture of local structures and helps avoid learning overly smooth solutions, it is worth noting that the Sobolev norm has scarcely been leveraged in the literature concerned with PDE discovery. One reason is that as k increases, obtaining and differentiating through these higher-order terms becomes progressively more costly and can make gradient-based training unstable. Moreover, using the Sobolev norm in its most general form as defined in Eq. 40, e.g. as a regularization term, makes it difficult to derive generalization guarantees. This is why, in [15], the authors restrict their convergence analysis of PINNs to affine differential operators, i.e. limiting the approach to linear PDEs. However, in post-hoc PDE evaluation, we argue 31 that these constraints can be more readily relaxed, paving the way for the design of new metrics based on this norm. Note that in MDBENCH [12], the authors share the observation that there is no established metric for quantifying equation fidelity, and they claim that there is an urgent need for a “robust metric that captures functional equivalence, e.g., using a discretized version of the Sobolev semi-norm for PDE systems” .

▶ PDEs viewed as gradient flows : Another promising direction in post-hoc evaluation is to consider PDEs as evolving probability measures, and compare the ground truth data with the solutions of the discovered equation through the lens of Optimal Transport (OT) [91] and Gradient Flows (GF) [92]. Although OT is a longstanding theory [93], it has only attracted renewed interest from the machine learning community over the past decade following (i) the design of efficient algorithms for Wasserstein distance computation ( e.g. Sinkhorn algorithm [94]), (ii) the development of Wasserstein GANNs [95], and the use of GF in generative AI [32]. On the other hand, OT and GF offer significant advantages for capturing the functional properties of dynamical systems. Indeed, many PDEs, such as Fokker-Planck, Keller-Segel or diffusion, advection and aggregation equations in general, with many related real-world applications, have been shown to be interpreted as GF [96, 97, 98]. This provides an original way to understand the evolution of an equation as the steepest descent of an energy functional in a (typically) Wasserstein metric space, offering the possibility to leverage the PDE’ underlying variational structure. Under this viewpoint, OT and GF provide new mathematical tools for studying stability and long time behavior of PDEs. They notably enabled the design of a new class of numerical methods (see e.g. [99, 100, 101]) endowed with better stability and convergence guarantees. In this context, a few papers have exploited the Wasserstein distance to evaluate the quality of a learned PDE. For instance, in [102], the authors deal with learning systems of interacting particles and compare GT and discovered solutions by leveraging the behavior of the Wasserstein distance. We recall that the latter measures the discrepancy between two probability distributions by computing the minimum transportation cost required to transform one distribution into the other. Under this definition, it enables the characterization of properties that are not accessible through metrics relying on pointwise errors or trajectory-based evaluation. For instance, two otherwise identical PDE solutions with a slight spatial or temporal shift will be considered significantly different under pointwise metrics, despite exhibiting nearly identical dynamics. By contrast, the Wasserstein distance will capture this geometric displacement and therefore identifies the solutions as highly similar. Moreover, unlike most of other alternative metrics, the Wasserstein distance is characterized by remaining informative over longer horizons, even with non-overlapping support. Some recent works have leveraged the Wasserstein distance from a theoretical standpoint to establish new stability estimates in equation discovery. This is the case, for example, in [103] where the authors deal with sparse identification of interaction kernels. Focusing on PDEs with interaction potentials (which arises in many applications) that can be formulated as GF, they control the Wasserstein distance between solutions generated using the true and learned interaction potentials. In [104], discovery is envisioned under the assumption that the dataset is not governed by the same dynamics. In this parametric PDE learning setting, they comnbine the Wasserstein distance with diffusion maps, to discover conserved quantities that vary across trajectories. Despite these few references, it is important to note that works exploiting OT and GF for PDE evaluation (during learning or as downstream task) are still at an early stage. Beyond the straightforward use of the Wasserstein distance between solution distributions (as seen above), no well-established methodology has yet emerged. On the other hand, the numerous recent advances in OT and GF are likely to pave the way for new evaluation frameworks capable of efficiently capturing the functional properties of a learned PDE and measuring jointly its accuracy, simplicity, physical consistency and long-time stability. 32 ▶ Discovered PDEs must also be numerically solvable to be useful: As discussed throughout this survey, PDE evaluation metrics aim to deal with the requirements associated with Questions Q1 to Q5 . Nevertheless, as recently highlighted in [18], even an equation that leads to accurate solutions, which is sparse, physically consistent, and generalizes well, may still be of limited practical value. For instance, a supposedly good PDE according to these criteria may also (i) exhibit non-standard terms which significantly complicate its numerical solution, (ii) describe an ill-posed problem (as discussed earlier in Sec. 4.4), (iii) lead to an unstable numerical discretization due, e.g. ,to excessively stiff dynamics, or more generally (iv) entail a prohibitive computational cost, making large-scale simulations or uncertainty quantification impractical. Numerical tractability is therefore not motivated by mathematical aesthetics, but because in most real-world applications, a PDE is only useful if it can actually be practically deployable, that is, simulated reliably, repeatedly, and at scale. As stated by [18], this issue has largely been overlooked in the literature, thereby justifying the need for a new class of dedicated metrics. Note that low robustness and ill-posedness can be partially identified through numerical criteria such as the mesh convergence (see Eq.(38)). On the other hand, recent works have started to consider simulation time as a PDE quality criterion. This is the case in PhysPDE [9] where the efficiency is measured by the total simulation wall-time . The wall-clock timing is also employed in AutoSINDy [80] allowing, e.g. to detect stiff PDEs that require finer time-stepping, leading to substantially longer integration times. Despite these few papers (see also SciGym [105]), further investigation is still required to develop metrics that can detect and assess solvability issues. 

▶ Towards evaluation metrics for fractional PDEs : Fractional PDEs generalize PDEs by allowing derivatives of arbitrary, thus possibly non-integer, order. They arise in various physical phenomena where non-locality plays a crucial role [106], such as in anomalous diffusion [107], transport in porous media [108], viscoelastic materials [109], geophysical modelling [110], or in biological systems [111]. Although the discovery of such PDEs has been investigated in a few papers [112, 113, 114, 115, 116], these equations pose several challenges lying in their nonlocal operators, which introduce long-range spatial or temporal interactions and significantly complicate their numerical processing [117]. Due to this nonlocal nature of the fractional operator, conventional evaluation metrics discussed in our study may become misleading. For instance, the sparsity/complexity of a fractional law is more difficult to capture since a single fractional derivative can encode substantially richer dynamics than a integer order-based term. By way of example, in [116], the authors show in their experiments that one fractional derivative with the same approximation quality can be used as an interpolation of two integer-order operators. This example shows that, although the resulting model is objectively sparser, it would be questionable to claim that the use of a fractional derivative, which is inherently more expressive and therefore more complex in a certain sense, leads to a simpler governing law. This illustrates that, in the context of non-integer-order PDEs, it becomes necessary to distinguish more carefully between the notions of sparsity and simplicity/interpretability through more refined evaluation metrics. On the other hand, the numerical evaluation of residuals is more sensitive to the choice of fractional derivative definition ( e.g. , Caputo, Riemann–Liouville, or Riesz) depending on the property one primarily aims to preserve, which are not taken into account by classic metrics. Moreover, the fractional orders themselves constitute continuous model parameters whose correctness should be evaluated alongside the PDE coefficients and the presence/absence of terms, adding an extra dimension to the evaluation procedure. These distinctive characteristics introduced by non-integer-order derivatives call for the development of a new generation of post-hoc evaluation metrics. We argue that this is essential to fairly assess future fractional PDE discovery methods, whose emergence is expected to accelerate in light of the significant progress made in the numerical computation or neural approximation of these derivatives, and the growing interest in fractional models due to their ability to describe complex nonlocal phenomena. 33 Acknowledgments 

This research was funded by the French National Research Agency (ANR) under the project MELISSA ” Methodological contributions in statistical Learning InSpired by SurfAce engineering ” -ANR-24-CE23-7140-01. The authors gratefully acknowledge Eduardo Brandao for his careful reading of the manuscript and for his valuable and insightful comments, which contributed to its improvement. 

# References 

[1] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational physics , 2019. [2] Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede Liu, Kaushik Bhat-tacharya, Andrew M. Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. In ICLR 2021, Austria, May 3-7, 2021 . OpenReview.net, 2021. [3] George Em Karniadakis, Ioannis G. Kevrekidis, Lu Lu, Paris Perdikaris, Sifan Wang, and Liu Yang. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics , 3(6), 5 2021. [4] Steven L. Brunton, Joshua L. Proctor, and J. Nathan Kutz. Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science , 113(15):3932–3937, April 2016. [5] Zichao Long, Yiping Lu, Xianzhong Ma, and Bin Dong. PDE-net: Learning PDEs from data. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3208–3216. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. [6] Ali Forootani, Pawan Goyal, and Peter Benner. A robust sindy approach by combining neural networks and an integral form. arXiv , abs/2309.07193, 2023. [7] Robert Stephany and Christopher Earls. Pde-learn: Using deep learning to discover partial differential equations from noisy, limited data. Neural Networks , 174:106242, 2024. [8] Fayad Ali Banna, Antoine Caradot, Eduardo Brandao, Jean-Philippe Colombier, R´ emi Emonet, and Marc Sebban. Unrolled-sindy: A stable explicit method for non linear pde discovery from sparsely sampled data. In ECML 2026 , 2026. [9] Mingquan Feng, Yixin Huang, Yizhou Liu, Bofang Jiang, and Junchi Yan. PhysPDE: Rethinking PDE discovery and a physical HYpothesis selection benchmark. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [10] Kadierdan Kaheman, J. Nathan Kutz, and Steven L. Brunton. Sindy-pi: a robust algorithm for parallel implicit sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 476(2242), October 2020. [11] Hao Xu, Junsheng Zeng, and Dongxiao Zhang. Discovery of partial differential equations from highly noisy and sparse data with physics-informed information criterion. Research , 6, January 2023. 34 [12] Amirmohammad Ziaei Bideh, Aleksandra Georgievska, and Jonathan Gryak. Mdbench: Bench-marking data-driven methods for model discovery. In Proc. Conf. AAAI Artif. Intell. , 2026. [13] Benjamin Girault, R´ emi Emonet, Amaury Habrard, Jordan Patracone, and Marc Sebban. Ap-proximation Error of Sobolev Regular Functions with tanh Neural Networks: Theoretical Impact on PINNs. ECML 2024, March 2024. [14] Tim De Ryck, Ameya D Jagtap, and Siddhartha Mishra. Error estimates for physics-informed neural networks approximating the navier–stokes equations. IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis ,44(1):83–119, 02 2024. [15] Nathan Doum` eche, G´ erard Biau, and Claire Boyer. On the convergence of PINNs. Bernoulli ,31(3):2127 – 2151, 2025. [16] K. Miettinen. Nonlinear multiobjective optimization . Kluwer, Boston, USA, 1999. [17] Beatriz Regina Brum, Luiza Lober, Isolde Terezinha Santos Previdelli, and Francisco A. Ro-drigues. Discovering equations from data: symbolic regression in dynamical systems. Journal of Physics: Complexity , 7, 2025. [18] Siyu Lou, Hao Xu, Wenguan Wang, Lu Lu, Hao Sun, Yang Liu, Linfeng Zhang, Dongxiao Zhang, and Yuntian Chen. Data-driven discovery of governing differential equations across physical systems. arXiv , abs/2606.09638, 2026. [19] John H. Lagergren, John T. Nardini, G. Michael Lavigne, Erica M. Rutter, and Kevin B. Flores. Learning partial differential equations for biological transport models from noisy spatio-temporal data. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences ,476(2234):20190800, February 2020. [20] Adeel Pervez, Efstratios Gavves, and Francesco Locatello. Mechanistic PDE networks for dis-covery of governing equations. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. [21] Mohsen Sadr, Tony Tohme, and Kamal Youcef-Toumi. Data-driven discovery of PDEs via the adjoint method. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. [22] Sarah Nogueira, Konstantinos Sechidis, and Gavin Brown. On the stability of feature selection algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(174):1–54, 2018. [23] Dimitris Bertsimas and Wes Gurnee. Learning sparse nonlinear dynamics via mixed-integer optimization. Nonlinear Dynamics , 7(11), 2022. [24] Austin Tripp, Sergio Bacallado, Sukriti Singh, and Jos´ e Miguel Hern´ andez-Lobato. Tanimoto random features for scalable molecular machine learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [25] Junqi Qu, Yan Zhang, Shangqian Gao, and Shibo Li. Dynamic bayesian optimization framework for instruction tuning in partial differential equation discovery. In Submitted to ACL Rolling Review - January 2026 , 2026. under review. [26] Samuel Holt, Zhaozhi Qian, Tennison Liu, James Weatherall, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Data-driven discovery of dynamical systems in pharmacology using large language models. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 96325–96366. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. 35 [27] Manuel Morales-Alvarado. Foundation models for equation discovery in high energy physics. 

arXiv , 2510.03397, 10 2025. [28] Parshin Shojaee, Ngoc-Hieu Nguyen, Kazem Meidani, Amir Barati Farimani, Khoa D Doan, and Chandan K. Reddy. LLM-SRBench: A new benchmark for scientific equation discovery with large language models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [29] Evgeny S. Saveliev, Samuel Holt, Nabeel Seedat, David L. Bentley, Jim Weatherall, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Influence-guided symbolic regression: Scientific discovery via llm-driven equation search with granular feedback. arXiv , abs/2605.29184, 2026. [30] Daniel A. Messenger and David M. Bortz. Weak sindy for partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 443:110525, October 2021. [31] U. Fasel, J. N. Kutz, B. W. Brunton, and S. L. Brunton. Ensemble-sindy: Robust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and control. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 478(2260), April 2022. [32] Hao Xu, Yuntian Chen, Rui Cao, Tianning Tang, Mengge Du, Jian Li, Adrian H. Callaghan, and Dongxiao Zhang. Generative discovery of partial differential equations by learning from math handbooks. Nat Commun. , 16(1), 2025. [33] En-Hao Gao, Cunjing Ge, Yuan Jiang, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Discovering symbolic partial differ-ential equation by abductive learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 39 (NeurIPS’25) , 2025. [34] Grant Norman, Conor Rowan, Kurt Maute, and Alireza Doostan. Learning gradient flow: Using equation discovery to accelerate engineering optimization. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 460:119099, 2026. [35] Amie Wilkinson. What are lyapunov exponents, and why are they interesting? Bulletinof the American Mathematical Society , 54(1):79–105, 2017. [36] Andr´ ea Ducos, Audrey Denizot, Thomas Guyet, and Hugues Berry. Evaluating PDE discovery methods for multiscale modeling of biological signals. In Springer LNBI , volume 15959, Lyon, France, September 2025. Fran¸ cois Fages and Sabine P´ er` es. [37] K. J¨ arvelin and J. Kek¨ al¨ ainen. Cumulated gain-based evaluation of IR techniques. ACM Trans-actions on Information Systems (TOIS) , 20(4):422–446, 2002. [38] Pongpisit Thanasutives and Ken ichi Fukui. On uncertainty-penalized bayesian information criterion. arXiv , abs/2404.16881, 2024. [39] Robert Stephany and Christopher J. Earls. PDE-READ: human-readable partial differential equation discovery using deep learning. Neural Networks , 154:360–382, 2022. [40] Shilin Zhang, Yunqing Huang, Nianyu Yi, and shihan Zhang. Robust pde discovery under sparse and highly noisy conditions via attention neural networks. ArXiv , abs/2506.17908, 2025. [41] Weida Wang, Benteng Chen, Di Zhang, Wanhao Liu, Shuchen Pu, Ben Gao, Jin Zeng, Xiaoyong Wei, Tianshu Yu, Shuzhou Sun, Tianfan Fu, Wanli Ouyang, Lei Bai, Jiatong Li, Zifu Wang, Yuqiang Li, and Shufei Zhang. Chem-r: Learning to reason as a chemist. arXiv , abs/2510.16880, 2025. [42] Fang Lim, Jinbo Pan, and Shixuan Du. Discovery of interpretable t c descriptors in conventional superconductors guided by symbolic regression. Physical Review Materials , 10, 05 2026. 36 [43] Yizhi Huang, Rahul Ilango, and Hanlin Ren. Np-hardness of approximating meta-complexity: A cryptographic approach. SIAM Journal on Computing , 54(4):819–886, 2025. [44] Jianke Yang, Manu Bhat, Bryan Hu, Yadi Cao, Nima Dehmamy, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Discovering symbolic differential equations with symmetry invariants. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2026. Featured Certification, J2C Certification. [45] Makoto Takamoto, Timothy Praditia, Raphael Leiteritz, Daniel MacKinlay, Francesco Alesiani, Dirk Pfl¨ uger, and Mathias Niepert. Pdebench: An extensive benchmark for scientific machine learning. In S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 1596–1611. Curran As-sociates, Inc., 2022. [46] Congcong Zhu, Xiaoyan Xu, Jiayue Han, and Jingrun Chen. Physics-informed temporal align-ment for auto-regressive PDE foundation models. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [47] Zhao Chen, Yang Liu, and Hao Sun. Physics-informed learning of governing equations from scarce data. Nature Communications , 12(1), October 2021. [48] Jianwei Yang, Ohm Rishabh Venkatachalam, Mohammad Kianezhad, Sharvaree P. Vadgama, and Rose Yu. Think like a scientist: Physics-guided llm agent for equation discovery. ArXiv ,abs/2602.12259, 2026. [49] Phillip Lippe, Bastiaan S. Veeling, Paris Perdikaris, Richard E Turner, and Johannes Brandstet-ter. PDE-refiner: Achieving accurate long rollouts with neural PDE solvers. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [50] Seungwoo Yoo, Juil Koo, Daehyeon Choi, and Minhyuk Sung. Diffusionrollout: Uncertainty-aware rollout planning in long-horizon PDE solving. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-search , 2026. [51] Xiaoxiao Lu, Ye Yuan, and Jiahao Shi. Stable long-horizon pde forecasting via latent structured spectral propagators. arXiv , abs/2605.10154, 2026. [52] Richard P. Feynman. The Character of Physical Law . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1965. [53] Gregory Kang Ruey Lau, Yue Ran Kang, Zi-Yu Khoo, Apivich Hemachandra, Ruth Wan Theng Chew, and Bryan Kian Hsiang Low. README: Rapid equation discovery with multimodel encoders. In NeurIPS 2025 AI for Science Workshop , 2025. [54] Miles Cranmer, Alvaro Sanchez Gonzalez, Peter Battaglia, Rui Xu, Kyle Cranmer, David Spergel, and Shirley Ho. Discovering symbolic models from deep learning with inductive bi-ases. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 17429–17442. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. [55] Zhen Zhang, Zongren Zou, Ellen Kuhl, and George Em Karniadakis. Discovering a reac-tion–diffusion model for alzheimer’s disease by combining pinns with symbolic regression. Com-puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 419:116647, 2024. [56] Mengge Du, Yuntian Chen, and Dongxiao Zhang. Discover: Deep identification of symbolically concise open-form partial differential equations via enhanced reinforcement learning. Phys. Rev. Res. , 6:013182, Feb 2024. 37 [57] H. Akaike. Information Theory and an Extension of the Maximum Likelihood Principle , pages 267–281. Akademiai Kiad´ o, Budapest, 1973. [58] Gideon Schwarz. Estimating the dimension of a model. The Annals of Statistics , 6(2):461–464, March 1978. [59] N. M. Mangan, J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor. Model selection for dynamical systems via sparse regression and information criteria. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 473(2204):20170009, August 2017. [60] A.N. Kolmogorov. On tables of random numbers. Theoretical Computer Science , 207(2):387–395, 1998. [61] Deaglan J. Bartlett, Harry Desmond, and Pedro G. Ferreira. Exhaustive symbolic regression. 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 28(4):950–964, 2024. [62] Paul M.B. Vit´ anyi. How incomputable is kolmogorov complexity? Entropy , 22(4):408, April 2020. [63] Zihan Yu, Jingtao Ding, Yong Li, and Depeng Jin. Symbolic regression via MDLformer-guided search: from minimizing prediction error to minimizing description length. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [64] Silviu-Marian Udrescu and Max Tegmark. Ai feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic regression. Science Advances , 6(16), 2020. [65] Mirza Baig and Syeda Gillani. Symmetry-constrained language-guided program synthesis for discovering governing equations from noisy and partial observations. ArXiv , abs/2601.00088, 03 2026. [66] Andrea Perin and St´ ephane Deny. On the ability of deep networks to learn symmetries from data: A neural kernel theory. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 26:145:1–145:70, 2024. [67] Samuel E. Otto, Nicholas Zolman, J. Nathan Kutz, and Steven L. Brunton. A unified framework to enforce, discover, and promote symmetry in machine learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(248):1–83, 2025. [68] Tara Akhound-Sadegh, Laurence Perreault-Levasseur, Johannes Brandstetter, Max Welling, and Siamak Ravanbakhsh. Lie point symmetry and physics-informed networks. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [69] Yunfei Huang and David S. Greenberg. Geometric and physical constraints synergistically en-hance neural PDE surrogates. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. [70] Johannes Brandstetter, Max Welling, and Daniel E Worrall. Lie point symmetry data aug-mentation for neural PDE solvers. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceedings of the 39th International Con-ference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2241–2256. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. [71] David Dalton, Dirk Husmeier, and Hao Gao. Physics and lie symmetry informed Gaussian pro-cesses. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Con-ference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9953–9975. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024. 38 [72] Derek Hansen, Danielle C. Maddix, Shima Alizadeh, Gaurav Gupta, and Michael W. Mahoney. Learning physical models that can respect conservation laws. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena ,457:133952, January 2024. [73] Anthony Baez, Wang Zhang, Ziwen Ma, Subhro Das, Lam M. Nguyen, and Luca Daniel. Guar-anteeing conservation laws with projection in physics-informed neural networks. In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Data-driven and Differentiable Simulations, Surrogates, and Solvers , 2024. [74] Wenjun Ma, Jun Zhang, Kaikai Feng, Haoyun Xing, and Dongsheng Wen. Dimensional homo-geneity constrained gene expression programming for discovering governing equations. arXiv ,abs/2211.09679, 2024. [75] Jure Brence, Saˇ so Dˇ zeroski, and Ljupˇ co Todorovski. Dimensionally-consistent equation discovery through probabilistic attribute grammars. Information Sciences , 632:742–756, 2023. [76] Mehardeep Singh. Nexus: A revolutionary framework for autonomous equation discovery. Au-gust 2025. [77] H. Holden and N. Risebro. Front Tracking for Hyperbolic Conservation Laws . Springer-Verlag, New York City, NY, USA, 2002. [78] E. Hairer, C. Lubich, and G. Wanner. Geometric numerical integration, Structure-preserving algorithms for ordinary differential equations , volume 31. Springer-Verlag Berlin, 2006. [79] Fayad Ali Banna, Eduardo Brand˜ ao, Anthony Nakhoul, R´ emi Emonet, Marc Sebban, and Jean-Philippe Colombier. Photonic Learning in Ultrafast Laser-Induced Complexity. Ultrafast Sci-ence , March 2026. [80] Mohammad Amin Basiri and Charles Nicholson. Discovery of nonlinear dynamics with auto-mated basis function generation. arXiv , abs/2605.09696, 2026. [81] Susanne C. Brenner and Larkin R. Scott. The Mathematical Theory of Finite Element Methods ,volume 15 of Texts in Applied Mathematics . Springer, 2008. [82] Zhi-Yong Zhang, Hui Zhang, Li-Sheng Zhang, and Lei-Lei Guo. Enforcing continuous symmetries in physics-informed neural network for solving forward and inverse problems of partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 492:112415, 2023. [83] Jianke Yang, Nima Dehmamy, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Latent space symmetry discovery. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [84] Alex Gabel, Victoria Klein, Riccardo Valperga, Jeroen S. W. Lamb, Kevin Webster, Rick Quax, and Efstratios Gavves. Learning lie group symmetry transformations with neural networks. In Timothy Doster, Tegan Emerson, Henry Kvinge, Nina Miolane, Mathilde Papillon, Bastian Rieck, and Sophia Sanborn, editors, Proceedings of 2nd Annual Workshop on Topology, Algebra, and Geometry in Machine Learning (TAG-ML) , volume 221 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 50–59. PMLR, 28 Jul 2023. [85] Artem Moskalev, Anna Sepliarskaia, Ivan Sosnovik, and Arnold W.M. Smeulders. LieGG: Studying learned lie group generators. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2022. [86] Shurui Gui, Xiner Li, and Shuiwang Ji. Discovering physics laws of dynamical systems via invariant function learning. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. 39 [87] Jianke Yang, Wang Rao, Nima Dehmamy, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Symmetry-informed governing equation discovery. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [88] Nima Dehmamy, Robin Walters, Yanchen Liu, Dashun Wang, and Rose Yu. Automatic symme-try discovery with lie algebra convolutional network. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2021. [89] Vivan Doshi. Automated discovery of conservation laws via hybrid neural ode-transformers. 

arXiv , abs/2511.00102, 2025. [90] Shaoxuan Chen, Panayotis G. Kevrekidis, Hong-Kun Zhang, and Wei Zhu. Data-driven discovery of conservation laws from trajectories via neural deflation. arXiv , abs/2410.05445, 2024. [91] C´ edric Villani. Optimal transport – Old and new , volume 338, pages xxii+973. 01 2008. [92] Anne Gagneux, S´ egol` ene Tiffany Martin, R´ emi Emonet, Quentin Bertrand, and Mathurin Mas-sias. A visual dive into conditional flow matching. In The Fourth Blogpost Track at ICLR 2025 ,2025. [93] Gaspard Monge. M´ emoire sur la th´ eorie des d´ eblais et de remblais. Histoire de l’Acad´ emie Royale des Sciences de Paris , page 666–704, 1781. [94] Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In C.J. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. [95] Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and L´ eon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial net-works. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Con-ference on Machine Learning , volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 214–223. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. [96] Filippo Santambrogio. Euclidean, Metric, and Wasserstein gradient flows: an overview. Math. Sci. , 7:87–154, 2017. [97] Steffen Arnrich, Alexander Mielke, Mark A. Peletier, Giuseppe Savar´ e, and Marco Veneroni. Passing to the limit in a wasserstein gradient flow: from diffusion to reaction. Calculus of Variations and Partial Differential Equations , 44(3-4):419–454, August 2011. [98] Lucas C. F. Ferreira and Julio C. Valencia-Guevara. Gradient flows of time-dependent functionals in metric spaces and applications for pdes. Monatshefte f¨ ur Mathematik , 185(2):231–268, 2018. [99] Quentin M´ erigot. A multiscale approach to optimal transport. Computer Graphics Forum ,30:1583 – 1592, 2011 2011. [100] Jean-David Benamou and Guillaume Carlier. Augmented Lagrangian methods for transport optimization, mean field games and degenerate elliptic equations. J. Optim. Theory Appl. ,167(1):1–26, 2015. [101] Jose A. Carrillo, Katy Craig, Li Wang, and Chaozhen Wei. Primal dual methods for wasserstein gradient flows. Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 22(2):389–443, 2022. [102] Quanjun Lang and Fei Lu. Learning interaction kernels in mean-field equations of first-order systems of interacting particles. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 44(1):A260–A285, 2022. 40 [103] Jose A. Carrillo, Gissell Estrada-Rodriguez, Laszlo Mikolas, and Sui Tang. Sparse identifica-tion of nonlocal interaction kernels in nonlinear gradient flow equations via partial inversion. 

Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences , 35(5):1073–1131, 2026. [104] Peter Yucheng Lu. Interpretable physics-informed machine learning methods for scientific mod-eling and data analysis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology , September 2022. [105] Haonan Duan, Stephen Zhewen Lu, Caitlin Fiona Harrigan, Nishkrit Desai, Jiarui Lu, Michal Koziarski, Leonardo Cotta, and Chris J. Maddison. Measuring scientific capabilities of language models with a systems biology dry lab. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2026. [106] HongGuang Sun, Yong Zhang, Dumitru Baleanu, Wen Chen, and YangQuan Chen. A new collec-tion of real world applications of fractional calculus in science and engineering. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation , 64:213–231, 2018. [107] Richard L. Magin, Osama Abdullah, Dumitru Baleanu, and Xiaohong Joe Zhou. Anomalous diffusion expressed through fractional order differential operators in the bloch–torrey equation. 

Journal of Magnetic Resonance , 190(2):255–270, 2008. [108] Lukasz Plociniczak. Analytical studies of a time-fractional porous medium equation. deriva-tion, approximation and applications. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation , 24(1):169–183, 2015. [109] Meihua Zhang, Yajuan Hao, Yiming Chen, Gang Cheng, Thierry Barri` ere, and Jingguo Qu. Modeling and dynamic analysis of fractional order nonlinear viscoelastic rod. International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics , 162:104699, 2024. [110] Jos´ e Humberto De Prates and Davidson Moreira. Fractional derivatives in geophysical modelling: Approaches using the modified adomian decomposition method. Pure and Applied Geophysics ,177, 09 2020. [111] Ishtiaq Ali. Dynamical analysis of two-dimensional fractional-order-in-time biological population model using chebyshev spectral method. Fractal and Fractional , 8(6):325, May 2024. [112] Xiangnan Yu, Hao Xu, Zhiping Mao, HongGuang Sun, Yong Zhang, Dongxiao Zhang, and Yun-tian Chen. A data-driven framework for discovering fractional differential equations in complex systems. arXiv , abs/2412.03970, 2024. [113] Abhishek Kumar Singh, Mani Mehra, and Anatoly A. Alikhanov. Data-Driven Discovery of Time Fractional Differential Equations , page 56–63. Springer International Publishing, 2022. [114] Yash Vats, Mani Mehra, Dietmar Oelz, and Abhishek Kumar Singh. A new perspective for scientific modelling: Sparse reconstruction-based approach for learning time-space fractional differential equations. Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics , 19(12):121003, 09 2024. [115] Abhishek Kumar Singh, Mani Mehra, and Samarth Gulyani. Learning parameters of a system of variable order fractional differential equations. Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations , 39(3):1962–1976, April 2021. [116] Mamikon Gulian, Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George Karniadakis. Machine learning of space-fractional differential equations. arXiv , abs/1808.00931, 2019. 41 [117] Anjali Chaudhary, Vikram Singh, and Sumit Malik. Approximate solutions for fractional partial differential equations using new operational matrices and collocation technique. Physica Scripta ,101(7):075208, feb 2026. 42