Title: Bridging Scales: Asymptotic Analysis and AI-Assisted Formalization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10138v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:13:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Proceedings of the International Consortium of Chinese Mathematicians

# Bridging Scales: Asymptotic Analysis and AI-Assisted Formalization 

Xu Yang 

Abstract. Asymptotic analysis is one of the classical tools for bridg-ing models across scales. Behind many such derivations lies a common symbolic structure: an ansatz, a substitution, an order-by-order match-ing procedure, and the extraction of effective equations or interface conditions. This article revisits that structure through two represen-tative bridges: the kinetic-to-fluid limit, illustrated by radiative transfer with interface layers and by neural-network approximations of Boltz-mann equations, and the quantum-to-classical limit, illustrated by the Frozen Gaussian Approximation and its Dirac extension. We then ex-plain why such derivations are natural candidates for AI-assisted formal-ization: their recurring symbolic structures can be organized, verified, and reused. In this sense, a carefully structured expository paper may serve not only as a review, but also as a mathematical seed for future AI-assisted environments. 

1. Introduction 

This paper revisits several classical asymptotic derivations from a com-mon perspective: they are not only bridges between models at different phys-ical scales, but also structured symbolic arguments. This perspective guides both the review of classical multiscale limits and the later discussion of AI-assisted formalization. 

1.1. Asymptotic analysis as a unifying lens across scales. Much of applied mathematics is concerned with the passage between descriptions of the same physical system at different scales. A gas may be described by the positions and velocities of its molecules, by a kinetic density governed by a Boltzmann equation, or by the macroscopic density, velocity and tem-perature fields of fluid dynamics. A quantum particle may be described by a wave function solving the Schr¨ odinger or Dirac equation, or, in the regime 

This paper is based on an invited plenary lecture delivered by the author at the International Congress of Chinese Mathematicians (ICCM 2025), January 2–8, 2026.  

> 1
> arXiv:2606.10138v1 [math.NA] 8 Jun 2026 2XU YANG

where the wavelength is small compared with the scale of variation of the potential, by classical trajectories carrying amplitudes and phases. In each case there is a small parameter (e.g., the Knudsen number, the mean free path, the rescaled Planck constant) whose vanishing marks the transition from a finer to a coarser model. Asymptotic analysis is the mathematical tool that makes such transi-tions precise. Rather than solving the fine-scale model and then observing that its solutions resemble those of the coarse-scale model, one introduces an expansion of the solution in powers of the small parameter, substitutes it into the governing equation, and collects terms order by order. The lead-ing order typically recovers the coarse-scale model; higher orders produce systematic corrections, and, when the geometry is nontrivial, boundary and interface layers that the coarse-scale model cannot see on its own. Classical examples include the Hilbert and Chapman–Enskog expansions connecting kinetic theory to hydrodynamics, the WKB method connecting wave me-chanics to classical mechanics, and the matched asymptotic expansions of boundary-layer theory. It remains central to multiscale modeling today. What unifies these examples is not the physics but the method . The same handful of structural moves recurs: substitution of an ansatz, match-ing by orders of a small parameter, the imposition of solvability (Fredholm) conditions, the derivation of transport or diffusion equations for the sur-viving unknowns, and the resolution of layers by stretched variables. This observation is the starting point for the perspective of this paper. 

1.2. The structural pattern of asymptotic derivation. Viewed at the level of mathematical structure, many asymptotic derivations follow the same recipe. One first chooses an ansatz , a parameterized form for the so-lution, such as a power series f = f (0) + εf (1) + ε2f (2) + · · · , a single-phase WKB form ω e iS/ε , or a phase-space integral over Gaussian wave packets. One then substitutes the ansatz into the governing equation and expands the resulting expression in powers of ε, often after a Taylor expansion of the potential or the collision kernel about a moving center. The next step is to match terms order by order, obtaining at each order either an alge-braic constraint, such as an eigenvalue relation or a solvability condition, or an evolution equation for one of the unknown profiles. Finally, one as-sembles the resulting hierarchy into a closed coarse-scale model, sometimes supplemented by layer equations near boundaries or interfaces. The individual steps within this recipe are drawn from a small, recur-ring vocabulary: power matching in ε; integration by parts under an oscil-latory integral; the method of stationary phase; moment closure against a Maxwellian or against an eigenbasis; the Fredholm alternative; and changes of variables along characteristic flows. A reader who has carried out one such derivation in detail will recognize every one of these moves in the next, even when the physical setting is entirely different. The vocabulary is shared; only the nouns change. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 3

Figure 1 sketches this structural pattern as a flowchart. The classical recipe (ansatz, substitution, matching, extraction of effective equations) is shown on the left. The right-hand side is more speculative: it illustrates, by way of one possible correspondence, how the same symbolic moves might become targets for machine-assisted formalization, with each step suggesting candidate components for a growing certified library. The precise shape of such a library is left open here; the diagram is meant only to make the connection visible.   

> Ansatz
> (parameterized form)
> Substitute
> into governing equation
> Match orders in ε
> (solvability)
> Effective models
> (interface conditions)
> Certified ansatz templates
> Differentiation Taylor expansion
> Order matching solvability conditions
> Differential equations matching diagrams
> Reusable formal library
> Classical asymptotic derivation AI-assisted formalization

Figure 1. An illustrative correspondence between the struc-tural pattern of asymptotic analysis (left) and a possible AI-assisted view (right). The right-hand column is one tentative mapping among several; it is meant to make the connection between the classical recipe and machine-assisted formaliza-tion visible, not to define the components of any specific li-brary. See Section 4 for the underlying discussion. 

1.3. The AI connection. This vocabulary has a striking property: it is systematic in principle but error-prone in practice. Tracking which terms are O(ε) and which are O(ε2), keeping signs and indices consistent through pages of oscillatory-integral manipulation, and verifying that the side condi-tions needed for integration by parts actually hold are often not where the main conceptual difficulty lies, but they are among the places where hand calculations are most vulnerable to error. This is precisely the kind of sym-bolic and structural work for which modern AI and formal verification tools are increasingly relevant: large language models can help draft the high-level structure of such arguments, while formal proof assistants such as Lean [ 16 ]can, in principle, certify individual steps. The perspective taken here is that an asymptotic derivation, viewed as a structured symbolic object built from a small recurring vocabulary, is a 4 XU YANG 

natural candidate for machine-assisted mathematics. Our aim is to make the case for this perspective, rather than to carry out such a formalization. Through two representative derivations and a closing discussion of one con-crete framework for machine-assisted proof refinement, we suggest that the symbolic structure of asymptotic analysis is regular enough, and its recurring moves sufficiently few, that certified and reusable libraries for asymptotic derivations may be a productive direction. As a tentative organizing princi-ple, we propose a reusable-formalization principle : once a difficult member of a family of derivations has been formalized, the marginal cost of formal-izing related derivations should drop substantially, because the same formal steps recur across the derivations. It may help to separate what this article establishes from what it sug-gests. What we treat as established is structural: the derivations reviewed here are assembled from the same small vocabulary of symbolic moves, made explicit in each case. What we suggest is the possible formalization payoff: this vocabulary may be encoded as certified, reusable primitives in a proof assistant, and certifying one difficult derivation may lower the cost of formal-izing related ones. The first is a claim about the mathematics, supported by the examples below; the second is a proposed direction for machine-assisted formalization, motivated by the repeated structure of these examples. We develop this perspective through two classical bridges. The first, from kinetic to fluid, is reviewed through the diffusion limit of a radiative trans-fer equation with interfaces, and then connected to a recent error analysis of physics-informed neural networks for Boltzmann equations, a setting in which the asymptotic structure of the classical derivation reappears in the analysis of an AI-based solver. The second, from quantum to continuum, is developed in depth through the Frozen Gaussian Approximation, includ-ing its extension to the Dirac equation and the asymptotic preservation of the non-relativistic limit. The derivation of the Frozen Gaussian amplitude equation is the technical centerpiece of the paper and the concrete object to which the formalization discussion returns. There is also a broader motivation for writing this paper in the present form. As AI-assisted mathematical systems become more powerful, research articles may increasingly serve a dual role. They will remain expository and archival documents for human readers, while also potentially serving as structured inputs to AI environments that verify, recombine, and extend existing arguments. A carefully written derivation, with its ansatz, matching procedure, solvability conditions, side assumptions, and reusable lemmas made explicit, can function as a mathematical seed: it records not only conclusions, but also reusable structures of reasoning that future machine-assisted systems may formalize, verify, and extend. In this sense, a review article can do more than summarize known results; it can identify symbolic patterns that may later be preserved, certified, and reused. This perspective motivates the way the material is presented below. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 5

Outline. Section 2 reviews the kinetic-to-fluid passage, including the diffu-sion limit of the radiative transfer equation, interface conditions obtained through an interface-layer analysis, and recent error and asymptotic-preservation estimates for physics-informed neural networks approximating Boltzmann equations. The goal is to show how the same asymptotic structure appears in both classical derivations and learning-based numerical methods. Section 3 develops the quantum-to-continuum passage through the Frozen Gaussian Approximation, presenting its formulation, the derivation of the amplitude equation, the extension to the Dirac equation, and the non-relativistic limit. This section serves as the main technical example. Section 4 turns to machine-assisted formalization: it describes the angelic-execution framework of [ 6] and returns to the Frozen Gaussian derivation as a concrete candidate for the kind of structured argument that could be made explicit, certified, and reused. Section 5 concludes. Throughout, the emphasis is on the structure of the derivations rather than on the sharpest available hypotheses. Results are stated in the form most useful for the present discussion, and the original papers are cited for more complete assumptions and proofs. 

2. From kinetic to fluid 

The passage from a kinetic description, in which a density is resolved in both physical space and velocity (or direction), to a fluid description in which only macroscopic moments survive, is the oldest and best-understood instance of the asymptotic bridges considered in this paper. We review it in a concrete setting (the radiative transfer equation with an interface) where the derivation produces not only a diffusion equation but also non-trivial transmission conditions at the interface, computed through an interface-layer analysis. We then turn to a modern counterpart, in which the same asymptotic structure governs the error analysis of a neural-network solver. 

2.1. The transport equation and its diffusive scaling. Consider the propagation of the phase-space energy density of waves in a hetero-geneous medium with weak random fluctuations in the high frequency regime. In a planar-symmetric medium the three-dimensional radiative transfer equation reduces to a one-dimensional transport equation for the density a(t, x, μ ), where x ∈ R is position and μ ∈ [−1, 1] is the cosine of the angle between the direction of propagation and the x-axis (e.g., [21, 14, 8 ]). Writing v(x) for the background sound speed and σ(x, μ, μ ′)for the differential scattering cross section, and rescaling time and space by the scattering mean free path ε, the equation takes the diffusive scaling (2.1) ε2 ∂ta + ε μ ∂ xa =

Z 1

> −1

σ(x, μ, μ ′)a(t, x, μ ′) − a(t, x, μ ) dμ ′.

The total scattering cross section is Σ( x) = R 1 

> −1

σ(x, μ, μ ′) dμ ′, and the right-hand side is the scattering operator, which relaxes a toward its angular 6 XU YANG 

average. The factor ε2 in front of the time derivative and ε in front of the transport term encode the diffusive scaling: many scattering events occur on the time scale of interest, and the question is what effective equation governs the angular average of a as ε → 0. 

2.2. Hilbert expansion and the diffusion limit. The ansatz is the Hilbert expansion (2.2) a(t, x, μ ) = a(0) (t, x, μ ) + ε a (1) (t, x, μ ) + ε2 a(2) (t, x, μ ) + · · · .

Substituting (2.2) into (2.1) and matching powers of ε realizes the struc-tural pattern of Section 1.2 in its purest form. At order ε0 the scattering operator annihilates a(0) , which forces a(0) = a(0) (t, x ) to be independent of the angle μ: the leading-order density is isotropic. At order ε1 one solves an auxiliary equation for the first correction, (2.3) 

a(1) (t, x, μ ) = − θ(μ)Σ ∂xa(0) (t, x ), θ(μ) −

Z 1

> −1

σ(μ, μ ′)Σ θ(μ′) dμ ′ = μ, 

the auxiliary function θ encoding the angular response of the medium. At order ε2 a solvability (Fredholm) condition, the requirement that the equa-tion for a(2) have a solution, closes the hierarchy and produces a diffusion equation for the isotropic leading order. We record the outcome. 

Theorem 2.1 (Diffusion limit [ 8]) . Let a solve (2.1) with scattering cross section σ and total cross section Σ bounded and bounded below, and with well-prepared initial data. Then, away from boundaries and interfaces, the leading-order density a(0) (t, x ) in the expansion (2.2) is independent of μ

and satisfies the diffusion equation 

(2.4) 2 ∂ta(0) − ∂x



D ∂ xa(0) 

= 0 , D = 1Σ

Z 1

> −1

μ θ (μ) dμ, 

with θ the solution of the auxiliary problem (2.3) .

The diffusion constant D is not an input but an output of the derivation: it is computed from the microscopic scattering data through the auxiliary function θ. This is characteristic of asymptotic bridges: the coarse model inherits effective coefficients determined by the fine model. 

2.3. Interface conditions via interface-layer analysis. The diffu-sion limit of Theorem 2.1 holds in the interior of a homogeneous medium. The situation of real interest is when the sound speed v(x) is discontinuous across an interface, say at x = 0, separating two media. Waves crossing the interface undergo reflection and transmission, and a naive matching of the two interior diffusion equations across x = 0 is incorrect: an interface layer forms, in which the density is genuinely anisotropic, and the correct condi-tions linking the two diffusion solutions must be extracted from a boundary-layer analysis of the kinetic equation [ 8, 3 ]. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 7

At the kinetic level the two solutions are coupled by reflection and trans-mission operators that redistribute energy among directions. The angle of transmission is fixed by Snell’s law, (2.5) 

p1 − μ21

v1

=

p1 − μ22

v2

,

relating the cosine μ1 of the incident angle to the cosine μ2 of the transmit-ted angle, while reflection is specular. The response of each half-space to a prescribed incoming density is encoded in operators built from the Chan-drasekhar H-function [ 5], the classical special function of radiative transfer. Resolving the interface layer reduces to an eigenvalue problem posed at 

x = 0, whose solution yields a single effective transmission constant. 

Theorem 2.2 (Effective interface condition [ 8, 3 ]) . Across a discon-tinuity of the sound speed at x = 0 , the leading-order diffusion densities 

u1 = a(0) |x> 0 and u2 = a(0) |x< 0 satisfy the matching conditions 

(2.6) u2(0 −) = α u 1(0 +), D2 ∂xu2(0 −) = D1 ∂xu1(0 +),

where the flux is continuous and the density jumps by a factor α. For specular reflection with regular transmission, α = v21 /v 22 ; for diffuse transmission, α

is determined by an eigenvalue problem at the interface expressed through the Chandrasekhar H-function and the reflection and transmission operators. 

The derivation of Theorem 2.2 is the part of the kinetic-to-fluid story that most resembles the quantum case treated later: it is not a matter of formally setting ε = 0, but of constructing a layer correction whose match-ing to the interior solution produces a non-trivial effective condition. The two interface conditions (regular and diffuse) give visibly different interior profiles near x = 0; the diffuse case exhibits a genuine interface layer that the regular case does not, as confirmed by the numerical comparison in [ 8]. 

2.4. Physics-informed neural networks for Boltzmann equa-tions. The classical derivation above takes a kinetic model and produces a fluid model. A complementary modern question is whether a numerical 

solver based on machine learning respects the same asymptotic structure. We summarize recent results of Abdo, Chai, Hu and the author [ 1] on physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) for the Boltzmann equation, which show that the asymptotic analysis of the classical bridge reappears, almost un-changed, in the error analysis of the AI-based method. The classical Boltzmann equation ∂tf + ξ · ∇ xf = Q(f, f ) governs the density f (t, x, ξ ) of particles with velocity ξ. Linearizing about a global Maxwellian M through f = M + M 1/2u yields the linearized equation (2.7) ∂tu + ξ · ∇ xu + ν(ξ) u = K(u) + Γ( u, u ),

with a collision frequency ν, a bounded nonlocal operator K, and a qua-dratic term Γ. A PINN approximates the solution by a neural network uθ

whose parameters θ are trained to make a residual small. On the unbounded 8 XU YANG 

velocity domain one truncates to a cube QR of diameter R and defines the PDE residual (2.8) Ri[R; θ] = ∂tuθ + ξ · ∇ xuθ + ν(ξ) uθ − K(uθχQR ) − Γ( uθχQR , u θχQR ),

together with initial and (periodic) boundary residuals. The generalization error EG[R; θ] aggregates the L2 norms of these residuals, while the total error E[R; θ] is the L2 distance between the network and the true solution. The central question is whether smallness of the generalization error (which is what training can enforce) controls the total error, which is what one actually cares about. 

Theorem 2.3 (Total error controlled by residual [ 1]) . Let u solve (2.7) 

on [0 , T ] × T3 × R3 with ∥(1 + |ξ|)γ/ 2u∥L∞(0 ,T ;L∞(T3;L2(R3))) finite, and let uθ

be a tanh neural network. Then there is a constant C, depending on T , on the bounds for ν, K and Γ, and on the truncation radius R, such that 

(2.9) E[R; θ] ≤ C EG[R; θ].

In particular, as the training loss tends to zero the network converges to the solution of (2.7) near the global Maxwellian. 

A companion result [ 1] shows that the bound is not vacuous: for any tol-erance there exists a tanh network whose generalization error is below that tolerance, so the class of networks is rich enough for (2.9) to deliver genuine convergence. The proof of Theorem 2.3 rests on local estimates for the non-local operators K and Γ on the truncated domain, the analytic analogue of the moment estimates that close the Hilbert hierarchy in Section 2.2. 

2.5. Micro–macro decomposition and asymptotic preservation. 

The deepest point of contact between the classical and AI-based analyses is the multiscale regime. Consider the rescaled linear Boltzmann equation (2.10) ε ∂ tf ε + ξ · ∇ xf ε = 1

ε L(f ε),

where the linear collision operator is (2.11) L(f ) = 

Z

> R3

α(ξ, ξ ′) M (ξ)f (ξ′) − M (ξ′)f (ξ) dξ ′,

with a symmetric, bounded, strictly positive kernel α. As ε → 0 this equation has a diffusion limit, exactly as the radiative transfer equation did. A direct PINN discretization of (2.10) degrades as ε → 0, because the stiff factor 1 /ε 

amplifies residual errors. The remedy, following the asymptotic-preserving philosophy [ 9], is to build the micro–macro decomposition into the network. One writes (2.12) f ε(t, x, ξ ) = ρε(t, x ) M (ξ) + ε g ε(t, x, ξ ),

Z

> R3

gε dξ ≡ 0,

separating the equilibrium part ρεM from the microscopic fluctuation gε.Substituting (2.12) into (2.10) and projecting yields a coupled macro–micro BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 9

system, and as ε → 0 the macroscopic density ρε converges to the solu-tion ρ0 of a diffusion equation. Parameterizing ρε and gε separately by neu-ral networks (rather than parameterizing f ε directly) yields an asymptotic-preserving PINN whose accuracy survives the limit. 

Theorem 2.4 (Asymptotic preservation [1]) . For the micro–macro PINN associated with (2.10) , the total error of the macroscopic density ρε

is bounded by a multiple of the generalization error EG(Fε) of the coupled system, uniformly in ε. Consequently, since ∥ρε − ρ0∥ = O(ε), minimizing the generalization error yields a network that accurately approximates the diffusion limit ρ0 as ε → 0.

Theorem 2.4 is the statement that the diagram of approximations com-mutes: taking the network limit and taking the fluid limit can be inter-changed. This is the same commuting-diagram structure that, in Section 3, will express the compatibility of the Frozen Gaussian Approximation with the non-relativistic limit. The fact that it appears here, in the analysis of a neural-network solver, illustrates the perspective taken here: the asymp-totic structure of the classical derivation is not an artifact of the classical method but appears to be an invariant of the problem, governing the AI-based method as it governs the pencil-and-paper one. 

Figure 2. Convergence of the physics-informed neural net-work approximation for the Boltzmann equation as training proceeds. The left panel shows the error in the distribution function and the right panel shows the error in the density, plotted against the number of training iterations for fully-connected networks of fixed depth and varying width (16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512 neurons per layer). As the width grows the asymptotic error decreases and the training loss stabilizes at progressively smaller values, in agreement with the bound of Theorem 2.3. Reproduced from [ 1]. 10 XU YANG 

2.6. What the kinetic-to-fluid story illustrates. Two derivations have appeared in this section. The classical one takes the radiative trans-fer equation, applies a Hilbert expansion, and produces a diffusion equation with H-function interface conditions. The modern one takes the linearized Boltzmann equation, applies a micro–macro decomposition, and produces error and asymptotic-preservation estimates for a neural-network solver. Superficially these are different enterprises, one analytic and one compu-tational. Structurally they are the same: both rest on separating an equilib-rium (isotropic, Maxwellian) component from a fluctuation, on a solvability condition that closes the equation for the equilibrium part, and on the com-mutativity of the coarse-graining limit with the construction at hand. The vocabulary of Section 1.2 (moment closure, Fredholm solvability, commuting limits) is common to both. We now turn to a setting where the derivation is substantially more intricate, and where the case for AI assistance is cor-respondingly stronger. 

3. From quantum to kinetic 

We now develop the second asymptotic bridge of the paper, from quan-tum wave mechanics to classical phase-space dynamics, in substantially more depth. The central construction is the Frozen Gaussian Approximation (FGA); we derive it for the Dirac equation and establish the asymptotic preservation of the non-relativistic limit. The derivation of the amplitude equation, carried out in Section 3.5, is the technical centerpiece of the paper and the object to which the discussion of formalization in Section 4 returns. 

3.1. The semiclassical Schr¨ odinger equation. The simplest quantum-to-classical bridge concerns the semiclassical Schr¨ odinger equation (3.1) iε ∂ tψε = − ε2

2 ∆ψε + V (x) ψε, 0 < ε ≪ 1,

where ε is the rescaled Planck constant and V a smooth potential. As ε → 0the solution oscillates on the scale ε in both space and time, which makes direct numerical simulation prohibitively expensive: resolving the oscillations requires a mesh finer than ε in every dimension. The asymptotic methods of this section sidestep the cost by representing the oscillation analytically and evolving only the slowly varying data that ride on top of it. 

3.2. WKB and the breakdown at caustics. The classical ansatz is the WKB (geometric optics) form, a single oscillatory wave with slowly varying amplitude and phase, (3.2) ψε(t, x ) ≈ A(t, x ) exp 

 i

ε S(t, x )



.

Substituting (3.2) into (3.1) and matching powers of ε (the same move as in Section 2.2, now applied to an oscillatory rather than a power-series ansatz) BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 11 

gives at order ε0 the eikonal equation (3.3) ∂tS + 12 |∇ S|2 + V = 0 ,

a Hamilton–Jacobi equation, and at order ε1 the transport equation (3.4) ∂tA + ∇S · ∇ A + 12 A ∆S = 0 for the amplitude. The eikonal equation is solved by the method of charac-teristics: phase information is carried along classical trajectories ( Q(t), P (t)) obeying Hamilton’s equations ˙Q = P , ˙P = −∇ V (Q). The construction is exact and cheap, until two trajectories cross. At such a caustic the map 

q 7 → Q(t, q ) from initial to current position becomes singular, its Jacobian vanishes, the amplitude A in (3.4) blows up, and the single-phase ansatz (3.2) fails. Caustics are generic (any focusing potential produces them) so the breakdown is not a pathology to be assumed away but the central difficulty the more sophisticated methods are designed to overcome. 

3.3. Gaussian beam method. The Gaussian beam method removes the caustic singularity by allowing the phase to be complex. Around each central trajectory one introduces a locally quadratic phase whose Hes-sian M (t) is a complex symmetric matrix with positive-definite imaginary part, so that the beam decays like a Gaussian away from its center. The Hessian evolves by a matrix Riccati equation derived, once again, by matching orders of ε in a Taylor expansion of the potential about the central trajectory. Because Im M (t) remains positive definite for all time, the amplitude never blows up, and a superposition of Gaussian beams rep-resents the solution accurately even through caustics [ 11, 12, 13, 20, 10 ]. The price is that an individual beam spreads as Im M (t) decreases, so that accuracy over long times requires either reinitialization or a large number of beams. This tension (between the analytic convenience of a moving Gaussian and the spreading of its width) is exactly what the Frozen Gaussian Approximation resolves. 

3.4. The Frozen Gaussian Approximation. The idea of the FGA, originating in the chemistry literature with Herman and Kluk [ 7] and given a rigorous mathematical justification in [ 18, 15 ], is to keep the Gaussian width 

frozen (fixed once and for all) and to recover accuracy by superposing such frozen Gaussians over all of phase space, with a slowly varying amplitude that absorbs the spreading. The solution is represented as a phase-space integral over Gaussian wave packets centered on classical trajectories. We state the construction directly in the form needed for the Dirac equation in the following subsections, but the essential structure is already visible in the scalar Schr¨ odinger case (3.1), posed in spatial dimension d, for which [ 7](3.5) 

ψε

> FGA

(t, x ) = 1(2 πε )3d/ 2

Z

> R3d

a(t, q, p ) exp 

 i

ε Φ( t, x, y, q, p )



ψεI (y) dy dq dp, 12 XU YANG 

with the FGA phase (3.6) Φ = S(t, q, p )+ i2 |x−Q(t, q, p )|2+P (t, q, p )· x−Q(t, q, p )+ i2 |y−q|2−p·(y−q).

Here ( q, p ) ranges over initial phase-space points, ( Q, P ) are the classical trajectories issuing from them, and the integral over y projects the initial data onto the frozen Gaussian centered at q. The Gaussian factors i2 |x − Q|2

and i2 |y − q|2 have fixed width, in contrast to the evolving Hessian of a Gaussian beam; this is the sense in which the Gaussian is frozen. 

Definition 3.1 (FGA ansatz) . The FGA representation of the solu-tion to a semiclassical evolution equation is a phase-space integral of the form (3.5), in which the centers ( Q, P ) evolve along the Hamiltonian flow of the classical symbol, the action S accumulates along the flow, and the am-plitude a solves a transport equation derived by matching the ansatz against the equation to order ε.The centers and the action are governed by the Hamiltonian flow and its accompanying action integral, (3.7) ˙Q = ∂P h(Q, P ), ˙P = −∂Qh(Q, P ), ˙S = P · ∂tQ − h(Q, P ),

with Q(0) = q, P (0) = p, S(0) = 0, where h is the classical Hamiltonian (for Schr¨ odinger, h = |P |2/2 + V (Q)). What remains, and what carries all the analytic content, is the equation for the amplitude a.

3.5. Derivation of the FGA amplitude equation. This subsection is the technical heart of the paper. The derivation of the amplitude equation is where the structural moves of asymptotic analysis appear in their most intricate and most mechanizable form, and it is the concrete object to which Section 4 returns. We present it for the scalar case and indicate the Dirac modifications in Section 3.6; the full matrix-valued derivation is in [ 4]. One substitutes the ansatz, with a first-order correction b,(3.8) 

ψε(t, x ) = 1(2 πε )3d/ 2

Z

> R3d

 a(t, q, p ) + ε b (t, q, p ) eiΦ /ε v(y, q, p ) dy dq dp, 

into the evolution equation, and expands everything in powers of ε. The differentiations of the phase produce the key identities (3.9) ∂tΦ = ∂tS − P · ∂tQ + ( x − Q) · ∂t(P − iQ), ∇xΦ = i( x − Q) + P, 

and the potential term B (the scalar potential V of (3.1) in the Schr¨ odinger case, and the matrix potential of the Dirac case in Section 3.6) is Taylor-expanded about the moving center Q,(3.10) B(x) = B(Q)+( x−Q)·∂QB(Q)+ 12 (x−Q)2 : ∂2

> Q

B(Q)+ O (x−Q)3.

The crucial point (the move that makes the whole derivation work) is that the powers of ( x−Q) generated by (3.10) are not small pointwise, but become small under the oscillatory integral , because each factor of ( x − Q) can be BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 13 

traded, through integration by parts in the phase-space variables, for a factor of ε. This is the content of the following lemma, in which one introduces the holomorphic derivative ∂z = ∂q − i ∂p and the matrix Z = ∂z (Q + i P ). 

Lemma 3.2 (Oscillatory-integral identities; cf. [ 18, 15, 4 ]) . Under the equivalence relation f ∼ g defined by R f e iΦ /ε dy dq dp = R g e iΦ /ε dy dq dp ,one has, for any smooth vector field w and fixed matrix G, and with Ein-stein’s summation convention, 

w · (x − Q) ∼ − ε ∂ zk

 wj Z−1

> jk

,(3.11) (x − Q) · G (x − Q) ∼ ε ∂ zk Ql Glj Z−1 

> jk

+ O(ε2).(3.12) 

More generally, (x − Q)α ∼ O(ε|α|− 1) for multi-indices |α| ≥ 2.

The two identities of Lemma 3.2 are the workhorses: the first converts the linear term in the Taylor expansion (3.10) into an O(ε) contribution, and the second does the same for the quadratic term, each time at the cost of a holomorphic derivative and a factor of Z−1. With these in hand the matching proceeds in two stages. At order ε0 one obtains the eikonal-type relation, which forces a to be an eigenvector of the principal symbol and fixes the action S to satisfy (3.7). At order ε1, after applying Lemma 3.2 to remove every factor of ( x − Q), the first-order correction b drops out (it is annihilated by the same eigenprojection that fixed a), and what survives is a closed transport equation for a.

Theorem 3.3 (FGA amplitude equation [ 7]) . For the semiclassical Schr¨ odinger equation (3.1) , the FGA amplitude in (3.5) satisfies the transport equation 

(3.13) da dt = i2 a tr  Z−1∂z Q ∂ 2

> Q

V  + a

2 tr  Z−1∂z P , a(0 , q, p ) = 2 d/ 2,

with Z = ∂z (Q + i P ) and ∂z = ∂q − i ∂p. The two trace terms encode, respectively, the curvature of the potential along the flow and the spreading of the phase-space volume element. 

Equation (3.13) is the mechanism by which the Frozen Gaussian Ap-proximation maintains accuracy despite the fixed Gaussian width: the am-plitude a evolves so as to account for the spreading and interference of the underlying classical flow. The derivation just sketched consists of substitut-ing the ansatz, expanding the phase, Taylor-expanding the potential, apply-ing the oscillatory-integral identities to trade powers of ( x − Q) for powers of ε, projecting onto the relevant eigenspace, and identifying the remaining order-ε terms as the transport equation for the amplitude. This is a rep-resentative instance of the structural pattern described in Section 1.2, and it involves enough sign, index, and order tracking that a hand derivation is genuinely error-prone. We return to this point in Section 4. 14 XU YANG 

3.6. FGA for the Dirac equation. The Dirac equation describes a relativistic spin- 12 particle and, in the semiclassical regime, reads (3.14) iε ∂ tψε =  −icε bα · ∇ − bα · A(x) + mβc 2 + V (x)ψε,

where ψε ∈ C4 is a four-spinor, c is the speed of light, and bα, β are the Dirac matrices built from the 2 × 2 Pauli matrices [ 4]. The classical symbol 

D(q, p ) = c bα·p+B(q) is a Hermitian 4 ×4 matrix with two double eigenvalues (3.15) h±(q, p ) = ±λ(q, p ) + V (q), λ(q, p ) = p|pc − A(q)|2 + c4,

corresponding to the positive- and negative-energy branches. The new fea-ture, absent in every previously analyzed case, is that each eigenvalue has multiplicity two: the corresponding eigenspace is two-dimensional, spanned by a pair of eigenvectors r±,1, r ±,2. The amplitude is therefore not a scalar but a two-component vector a = ( a1, a 2)⊤ within each eigenspace, and the projection step in the derivation must resolve the amplitude within a degen-erate eigenspace rather than along a single eigendirection. The consequence is that the transport equation (3.13) is replaced by a coupled system (3.16) ddt 

a1

a2



=  L + M + N  a1

a2



,

in which L, M, N are explicit 2 × 2 matrices: L comes from the linear Tay-lor term via (3.11), M from the quadratic term via (3.12), and N from the variation of the eigenvectors r±,j along the flow. The structure of the deriva-tion is identical to the scalar case; only the eigenprojection is more delicate, because it must keep track of how the two-dimensional eigenspace rotates as (Q, P ) evolve. This is the precise sense in which the Dirac case is the harder member of the family, and, by the reusable-formalization principle, the right one to formalize. 

3.7. Non-relativistic limit and asymptotic preservation. The Dirac equation carries, in addition to the semiclassical parameter ε, a second asymptotic parameter: the speed of light c. As c → ∞ the Dirac equation formally reduces to a Schr¨ odinger equation; the standard deriva-tion splits the four-spinor into “upper-large” and “lower-small” two-spinors, 

ψl = eic2t(ψ1, ψ 2)⊤ and ψs = e−ic2t(ψ3, ψ 4)⊤, and an order-of-magnitude argument in c eliminates ψs to leave a Schr¨ odinger equation for ψl [4]. There are thus two limits in play, ε → 0 and c → ∞ , and two corresponding ways to arrive at a frozen Gaussian description of the non-relativistic semiclassical particle: one may take the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation first and then apply the FGA, or apply the FGA to the Dirac equation first and then take the non-relativistic limit of the resulting representation. The question is whether these two routes agree, whether the diagram of limits commutes. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 15 

Theorem 3.4 (Non-relativistic limit of the FGA [4]) . The non-relativistic limit of the Frozen Gaussian Approximation for the field-free linear Dirac equation is the Frozen Gaussian Approximation for the Schr¨ odinger equation. That is, the formal diagram relating the semiclas-sical and non-relativistic limits commutes: the FGA constructed from the non-relativistic Dirac equation coincides with the non-relativistic limit of the FGA constructed from the Dirac equation. 

The proof proceeds by expanding the Dirac Hamiltonian’s derivatives in powers of c−2 (e.g., ∂P h(Q, P ) = P  1 − P 2/(2 c2) + O(c−4)) and track-ing these expansions through the flow (3.7), the eigenvector formulas, and the amplitude system (3.16), verifying that each ingredient of the Dirac FGA converges to its Schr¨ odinger counterpart. The result is the quantum-to-continuum analogue of the asymptotic-preservation Theorem 2.4: a state-ment that the approximation respects a second limit built into the problem. The recurrence of the commuting-diagram structure across two entirely dif-ferent settings (a neural-network solver for Boltzmann in Section 2.5, a semi-classical approximation for Dirac here) again suggests that this structure is not tied to a particular method. Rather, it may reflect a more intrinsic fea-ture of the underlying asymptotic bridge. Equation Schroedinger FGA semi−classical Dirac Equation Schroedinger Equation FGA semi−classical Equation Relativistic Dirac     

> c→+∞
> ε → 0
> ε → 0
> c→+∞

Figure 3. Commutation scheme: the FGA for the Schr¨ odinger equation arises both from the semiclassical limit of the non-relativistic Dirac equation and from the non-relativistic limit of the semiclassical (FGA) Dirac descrip-tion. Reproduced from [ 4]. 

3.8. Error estimate. The FGA is not merely a formal construction: it converges, with a rate, to the true solution. 

Theorem 3.5 (FGA convergence [ 18, 15 ]) . Under suitable regularity and decay hypotheses on the potential and on the initial data, the Frozen Gaussian Approximation satisfies 

(3.17) ψε(t, ·) − ψε

> FGA

(t, ·) L2 ≤ C ε, 16 XU YANG 

where the constant C depends on the dimension, on the regularity of the potential, and on the time horizon T , but not on ε.

The estimate (3.17) holds uniformly through caustics (this is the payoff for which the frozen Gaussian was constructed) and the proof rests on the same oscillatory-integral identities (Lemma 3.2) that drive the derivation of the amplitude equation, applied now to bound the residual generated by truncating the ansatz at first order. 

3.9. Numerical illustration. The construction has been implemented and validated for the Dirac equation in [ 4]. A direct accuracy test compares the FGA solution against a high-accuracy spectral reference solution for a smooth potential; the two are visually indistinguishable at ε = 1 /27, con-sistent with the O(ε) rate of Theorem 3.5. A more demanding test is the 

Klein paradox , the relativistic phenomenon in which a particle incident on a sufficiently steep potential barrier is transmitted rather than reflected, through coupling between the positive- and negative-energy branches. This effect is genuinely quantum: in the semiclassical regime the direct FGA fails to reproduce the transmission, which illustrates a limitation of the method and motivates the further developments discussed in [ 4]. 

Figure 4. Accuracy test for the FGA applied to the free Dirac equation ( A ≡ 0, V ≡ 0, c = 1) at ε = 1/27,with Gaussian initial spinor of width μ = 32 centered at 

x0 = (1 , 1, 1) and momentum p0 = (1 , 0, 0). The left panel shows the FGA solution and the right panel the reference solution computed by a Fourier spectral method; the two are visually indistinguishable, illustrating the O(ε) accuracy of Theorem 3.5. Reproduced from [ 4]. The non-relativistic limit of Theorem 3.4 is also borne out numerically: as the speed of light c is increased through a range of values, the FGA-for-Dirac solution converges to the FGA-for-Schr¨ odinger solution, confirming the commuting diagram of Figure 3. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 17 

Figure 5. FGA simulation of the Klein paradox in two di-mensions in the semiclassical regime ( ε = 2 −7, c = 1), for an incident Gaussian wave packet impinging on a steep barrier potential. The plots show the density |ψ1|2 of the first spinor component: initial data (left) and the state at T = 1 after interaction with the barrier (right). Under the direct FGA the wave packet is almost entirely reflected; the substantial quantum transmission ( τ ≈ 0.485) predicted in the quantum regime cannot be recovered by a pure semiclassical method, illustrating an intrinsic limitation of the direct FGA in cap-turing this quantum effect. Reproduce from [ 4]. 

4. Toward AI-assisted asymptotic derivation 

The two bridges of Sections 2 and 3 were chosen to make a single point vivid: the asymptotic derivation is a structured symbolic object, assembled from a small vocabulary of recurring moves, and the harder its bookkeeping the stronger the case for mechanical assistance. The preceding examples also illustrate what such a mathematical seed should contain: not only final for-mulas, but also the intermediate identities, projections, side conditions, and limiting diagrams that make the derivation reusable. This final section de-velops that perspective. We describe what makes such derivations a natural target for AI assistance, sketch a concrete framework [ 6] for turning imper-fect machine-generated proofs into verified ones, and return to the Frozen Gaussian derivation as a candidate for formalization. 

4.1. The bookkeeping problem. Consider again the derivation of the FGA amplitude equation in Section 3.5. Every step is an instance of a named move: differentiate the phase (3.9); Taylor-expand the po-tential (3.10); apply an oscillatory-integral identity to trade a power of (x − Q) for a power of ε (Lemma 3.2); project onto an eigenspace; collect the surviving order-ε terms into a transport equation. None of these moves is where the main conceptual novelty lies. Yet the derivation is genuinely error-prone: the holomorphic derivative ∂z = ∂q − i∂p and the matrix 

Z = ∂z (Q + i P ) must be threaded consistently through every identity; 18 XU YANG 

the Einstein summation hides index errors; the Dirac case multiplies the difficulty by carrying a two-dimensional eigenspace whose basis rotates along the flow, so that the matrices L, M, N in (3.16) each require a separate, careful computation. A single dropped term (a side condition for an integration by parts that was never checked, a factor of c−2 misplaced in the non-relativistic expansion) propagates silently through pages of subsequent algebra. This is the regime in which machine assistance promises the most. The work is symbolic and rule-governed, the rules are few, and the failure mode is loss of bookkeeping rather than loss of insight. The question is how to organize the assistance so that the machine handles the bookkeeping while the human supplies the few genuinely mathematical judgments. 

4.2. Large language models and the verification gap. Large lan-guage models can now produce plausible drafts of mathematical arguments, including proof scripts in formal languages such as Lean [ 16 ] and its math-ematical library [ 19 ], and specialized systems trained for theorem proving (among them DeepSeek-Prover [ 17 ] and Llemma [ 2]) routinely succeed on competition-style problems. But a draft that looks correct is not a proof. As arguments grow longer and the side conditions subtler, generated scripts fail unpredictably: a missing measurability hypothesis, a misapplied library lemma, an undischarged precondition causes the proof assistant to reject the script, often with an opaque cascade of downstream errors. There is, in short, a gap between the high-level structure that a language model captures well and the low-level rigor that a verifier demands. For an asymptotic deriva-tion, the high-level structure is exactly the sequence of named moves above, and the low-level rigor is exactly the bookkeeping, so the gap is precisely where the difficulty of these derivations lives. 

4.3. Angelic execution and minimal-obligation refinement. The framework of [ 6] is designed to close this gap. Its central idea is angelic execution : rather than aborting at the first failed step, the system runs the machine-generated script under an optimistic semantics, replacing each fragment it cannot justify with a symbolic placeholder while preserving the surrounding structure. The result is an angelic proof , a structurally coherent script that would be complete if its placeholders were filled, and that exposes exactly which obligations the language model could not discharge. Presenting all of these obligations to a human would defeat the purpose, since they are typically numerous and interdependent. The framework there-fore builds a proof dependence graph recording the symbol-level data flow among the fragments, and solves a residual analysis problem (formulated as a MaxSAT optimization) to select a minimal core of obligations whose reso-lution makes all the others follow automatically. The human is queried only about this minimal core, in ordinary mathematical language rather than in the syntax of the proof assistant; once those few questions are answered, the system reconstructs the complete, verified proof. On benchmark problems BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 19 

across analysis and algebra this reduces the number of human interactions sharply while extending the range of theorems that can be carried all the way to a machine-checked conclusion [ 6]. import Mathlib                                                                     

> ...
> lemma oddC1on01 (hoddA :Function.Odd f) (hC1A :ContDiff ℝ1f) :
> ∀x∈Icc (0 :ℝ)1, fx=∫tin (0)..x, deriv ft:= by
> intro xA hxA
> have h0 :f0=0:= by sorry
> have hFTC :∫tin (0)..xA, deriv ft=fxA -f0:= by sorry
> simpa [h0, sub_eq_add_neg ]using hFTC.symm
> ...
> lemma pointwise_bound_on01 ...
> theorem oddC1_L2_le_deriv_L2 ...
> ...
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> 10
> 11
> 12

Mathematician 

yes/no 

Original Problem 

Angelic Proof 

Residual Analysis 

Minimal Residual Core (interaction) 

Sketching and Optimistic Checking 

Refinement 

hxA 

hoddA xA 

hC1A 

h0 (1) 

hFTC (2) 

oddC1on01 (2) 

hxFTC 

f 

> (Rewriting)
> (Bounding) (Symmetrizing)
> …

oddC1on01 (2) 

> …

Proof Dependence Graph 

Figure 6. The MathEye workflow for turning a machine-generated proof into a verified one, illustrated on a sample real-analysis problem. The system sketches a proof in Lean and runs it under optimistic (angelic) checking, leaving the steps it cannot yet justify as sorry placeholders (the an-gelic proof ). Residual analysis collects these as residual goals and records their dependencies in a proof dependence graph, from which a minimal residual core of obligations is selected. The mathematician is then queried only about this core, in ordinary mathematical language rather than proof-assistant syntax; the yes/no answers drive a refinement loop that re-constructs the complete, verified proof. Reproduced from [ 6]. The relevance to asymptotic derivation is direct. The named moves of Section 4.1 are the high-level structure a language model can be expected to propose; the unchecked side conditions and index manipulations are the placeholders an angelic execution would expose; and the few genuinely math-ematical judgments (does this integration by parts have the regularity it needs, is this the correct eigenprojection) are the minimal core a mathe-matician should be asked to confirm. 20 XU YANG 

4.4. The reusable-formalization principle. We can now state this perspective in its sharpest form. Asymptotic derivations across the kinetic-to-fluid and quantum-to-continuum bridges (e.g., in Sections 2.5 and 3.7) are assembled from the same small vocabulary: power matching, oscillatory-integral identities, integration by parts, the Fredholm alternative, moment closure, eigenprojection, and changes of variables along characteristic flows. Once a single nontrivial derivation in this vocabulary has been formalized (its lemmas stated and certified, its dependency structure recorded, its recur-ring side conditions catalogued) the formalization of the next derivation in the same family reuses most of that infrastructure. The certified oscillatory-integral identity that powers the FGA amplitude equation is the same iden-tity, up to the nouns, that one needs for the Gaussian beam method, for the WKB expansion, and for the general linear hyperbolic FGA. Formal-izing a difficult member of a family (e.g., the Dirac FGA) can make its easier relatives substantially less costly to certify. We call this the reusable-formalization principle : formalizing a difficult member of a family can lower the marginal cost of certifying related derivations, making the first hard derivation the one most worth investing in. 

4.5. A test case: one oscillatory-integral identity. To make the proposal concrete, consider what it would take to certify a single primitive: the first oscillatory-integral identity of Lemma 3.2, the move that trades a factor of ( x − Q) for a factor of ε. Writing only its statement in the language of a proof assistant already does useful work, because it forces every side condition that a hand derivation leaves implicit to be named. Schematically, in a Lean-like syntax (ASCII for the symbols):           

> -- Lemma 3.2, identity (1): trade (x-Q) for a power of e. -- OscEquiv e Phi f g :the integrals of f and of g against --exp(i*Phi/e) agree. dz := d/dq - i * d/dp. theorem osc_linear (he : 0 < e) -- semiclassical param (hPhi: IsFGAPhase Phi) -- Im Phi >= c|x-Q|^2 (hZ : forall z, IsUnit (Z z)) -- Z := dz(Q + i P) invertible (hw : w in Schwartz) -- decay => no IBP boundary : OscEquiv e Phi (fun z => inner (w z) (x - Q z)) (fun z => -e * dz (fun y => inv (Z y) * w y) z)

The four hypotheses are exactly the conditions the informal derivation uses silently: the Gaussian decay of the phase (which makes the integral converge and the integration by parts legitimate), the invertibility of Z (the non-degeneracy of the moving frame), and the decay of w (so the boundary term in the integration by parts vanishes). Even stating the lemma in this form already brings these assumptions to the surface. The proof is another matter. A proof assistant such as Lean [ 16 ] sup-plies, through Mathlib [ 19 ], general analytic tools (e.g., Schwartz space and integration by parts), but not yet a developed theory of oscillatory integrals BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 21 

with complex Gaussian phase, nor the stationary-phase and non-degeneracy estimates on which the proof of Lemma 3.2 actually rests; certifying this one identity would mean building that layer. This is precisely the kind of initial formalization effort described by the reusable-formalization principle. Once the oscillatory-integral machinery has been built, it becomes a reusable component for many derivations in the same family. Thus the first difficult primitive is also the one whose certification is most valuable. 

4.6. Outlook: an AI-assisted FGA derivation. Concretely, one can imagine an AI-assisted derivation of the amplitude equation (3.13), and of its Dirac counterpart (3.16), proceeding along the following lines. The named moves of Section 4.1 could be encoded as a library of certified primitives in a proof assistant: the phase-derivative identities (3.9), the Taylor expansion with explicit remainder, and above all the oscillatory-integral identities of Lemma 3.2, with their hypotheses made explicit. A language model proposes a derivation sketch (the sequence of moves, in order), which angelic execu-tion renders as an angelic proof, isolating as placeholders the steps whose side conditions it cannot discharge: typically the regularity needed for each integration by parts and the eigenprojection within the degenerate Dirac eigenspace. Residual analysis then extracts the minimal core of these place-holders, the mathematician confirms them, and the system reconstructs a verified derivation of the transport equation. The certified library that re-sults would be reusable: it would be much the same library that could carry a formalized Gaussian beam derivation, or a formalized WKB expansion, or the convergence estimate of Theorem 3.5, whose proof rests on the very same identities. The precise architecture of such a library remains open. From this viewpoint, the FGA derivation is not only an example to be checked, but also a starting point for a future library of semiclassical asymptotic arguments. Its phase identities, Taylor expansions, oscillatory-integral lemmas, and projection steps are precisely the kinds of components that can be reused in related derivations. This is one possible direction suggested by the examples above. The claim is not that asymptotic analysis will be automated away, but the oppo-site: that the discipline becomes more robust, not less, as these tools mature, because each derivation that is formalized becomes verified, reusable infras-tructure rather than a fragile pencil-and-paper artifact to be re-checked by hand at every reuse. 

5. Conclusion and outlook 

A single methodological pattern has run through this paper. The passage from kinetic to fluid, reviewed through the diffusion limit of radiative trans-fer and its H-function interface conditions; the analysis of physics-informed neural networks for Boltzmann equations, with its micro–macro decompo-sition and asymptotic-preserving estimates; the passage from quantum to 22 XU YANG 

continuum, developed in depth through the Frozen Gaussian Approxima-tion, its Dirac extension, and its non-relativistic limit: all are instances of the same recipe of ansatz, substitution, matching, and assembly, drawn from the same small vocabulary of symbolic moves. That vocabulary is the paper’s bridge to a second theme. Because the moves are few, rule-governed, and error-prone in ways that are well suited to machine assistance, the asymptotic derivation is a natural target for for-malization. Moreover, because the moves recur across derivations, a single formalized derivation yields reusable infrastructure that lowers the cost of all the others: the reusable-formalization principle of Section 4.4. The longer-term vision is not the replacement of the analyst, but the strengthening of analysis. As large language models, proof assistants, and frameworks such as angelic execution [ 6] mature, carefully written deriva-tions may become permanent, composable, and reusable mathematical ob-jects. In this way, review articles may also take on a new role: they can plant structured mathematical seeds in the emerging AI-assisted ecosystem, making the bridges between scales not only understood, but increasingly certified and easier to extend. 

Acknowledgements 

The author warmly thanks his collaborators on the works reviewed here (in particular Elie Abdo, Lihui Chai, Carlos Garc´ ıa-Cervera, Fran¸ cois Golse, Ruimeng Hu, Zhongyi Huang, Shi Jin, Xiaomei Liao, Emmanuel Lorin, Jian-feng Lu, and Hao Wu) and the organizers of ICCM 2025 for the invitation to deliver the lecture on which this paper is based. He also thanks his col-laborators on the MathEye framework: Yanju Chen, Ruizhe Qian, Jiaming Shan, Yufei Ding, Osbert Bastani, and Yu Feng. 

References           

> 1. Elie Abdo, Lihui Chai, Ruimeng Hu, and Xu Yang, Error estimates of physics-informed neural networks for approximating Boltzmann equations , IMA J. Numer. Anal. (2024), Accepted; arXiv:2407.08383. 2. Zhangir Azerbayev, Hailey Schoelkopf, Keiran Paster, Marco Dos Santos, Stephen McAleer, Albert Q Jiang, Jia Deng, Stella Biderman, and Sean Welleck, Llemma: An open language model for mathematics , arXiv:2310.10631 (2023). 3. Guillaume Bal and Leonid Ryzhik, Diffusion approximation of radiative transfer prob-lems with interfaces , SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 60 (2000), no. 6, 1887– 1912. 4. Lihui Chai, Emmanuel Lorin, and Xu Yang, Frozen Gaussian approximation for the Dirac equation in semiclassical regime , SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 57
> (2019), no. 5, 2383–2412. 5. Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Radiative transfer , Courier Corporation, 2013. 6. Yanju Chen, Ruizhe Qian, Jiaming Shan, Xu Yang, Yufei Ding, Osbert Bastani, and Yu Feng, From Sorry to QED: Refining LLM math proofs via angelic execution ,Preprint. BRIDGING SCALES BY ASYMPTOTIC ANALYSIS 23

7. Michael F Herman and Edward Kluk, A semiclassical justification for the use of non-spreading wavepackets in dynamics calculations , Chemical Physics 91 (1984), no. 1, 27–34. 8. Shi Jin, Xiaomei Liao, and Xu Yang, Computation of interface reflection and regular or diffuse transmission of the planar symmetric radiative transfer equation with isotropic scattering and its diffusion limit , SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 30 (2008), no. 4, 1992–2017. 9. Shi Jin, Zheng Ma, and Keke Wu, Asymptotic-preserving neural networks for multi-scale kinetic equations , arXiv:2306.15381 (2023). 10. Shi Jin, Peter Markowich, and Christof Sparber, Mathematical and computational methods for semiclassical Schr¨ odinger equations , Acta Numerica 20 (2011), 121–209. 11. Shi Jin, Hao Wu, and Xu Yang, Gaussian beam methods for the Schr¨ odinger equation in the semi-classical regime: Lagrangian and Eulerian formulations , Commun. Math. Sci. 6 (2008), 995–1020. 12. , Semi-Eulerian and high order Gaussian beam methods for the Schr¨ odinger equation in the semiclassical regime , Commun. Comput. Phys. 9 (2011), 668–687. 13. Shi Jin, Hao Wu, Xu Yang, and Zhongyi Huang, Bloch decomposition-based Gaussian beam method for the Schr¨ odinger equation with periodic potentials , J. Comput. Phys. 

229 (2010), 4869–4883. 14. Shi Jin, Xu Yang, and Guangwei Yuan, A domain decomposition method for a two-scale transport equation with energy flux conserved at the interface , Kinetic and Related Models 1 (2008), no. 1, 65–84. 15. Jianfeng Lu and Xu Yang, Frozen Gaussian approximation for general linear strictly hyperbolic systems: Formulation and Eulerian methods , Multiscale Modeling & Simu-lation 10 (2012), no. 2, 451–472. 16. Leonardo de Moura and Sebastian Ullrich, The Lean 4 theorem prover and program-ming language , International Conference on Automated Deduction, Springer, 2021, pp. 625–635. 17. Z. Z. Ren, Z. Shao, J. Song, H. Xin, H. Wang, W. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z. Fu, Q. Zhu, D. Yang, Z. F. Wu, Z. Gou, S. Ma, H. Tang, Y. Liu, W. Gao, D. Guo, and C. Ruan, 

DeepSeek-Prover-V2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for subgoal decomposition , arXiv:2504.21801, 2025. 18. Torben Swart and Vidian Rousse, A mathematical justification for the Herman-Kluk propagator , Communications in mathematical physics 286 (2009), no. 2, 725–750. 19. The mathlib Community, The Lean mathematical library , Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Certified Programs and Proofs (CPP 2020), 2020, pp. 367–381. 20. Hao Wu and Xu Yang, The Eulerian Gaussian beam method for high frequency wave propagation in the reduced momentum space , Wave Motion 50 (2013), 1036–1049. 21. Xu Yang, Francois Golse, Zhongyi Huang, and Shi Jin, Numerical study of a domain decomposition method for a two-scale linear transport equation , Networks Heterog. Media 1 (2006), no. 1, 143–166. 

Department of Mathematics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 

Email address : xuyang@math.ucsb.edu