Title: System-Anchored Knee Estimation for Low-Cost Context Window Selection in PDE Forecasting

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25025v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:31:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# System-Anchored Knee Estimation for Low-Cost Context Window Selection in PDE Forecasting 

Wenshuo Wang 1, Fan Zhang 2,3∗ 

> 1

School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology, China  

> 2

State Key Laboratory of Ocean Sensing & Ocean College, Zhejiang University, China  

> 3

Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 

202364870251@mail.scut.edu.cn , f.zhang@zju.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Autoregressive neural PDE simulators predict the evolution of physical fields one step at a time from a finite history, but low-cost context-window selection for such simulators remains an unformalized problem. Existing approaches to context-window selection in time-series forecasting include exhaustive validation, direct low-cost search, and system-theoretic memory estimation, but they are either expensive, brittle, or not directly aligned with downstream rollout performance. We formalize explicit context-window selection for fixed-window autoregressive neural PDE simulators as an independent low-cost algorithmic problem, and pro-pose System-Anchored Knee Estimation (SAKE) , a two-stage method that first identifies a small structured candidate set from physically interpretable system anchors and then performs knee-aware downstream selection within it. Across all eight PDEBench families evaluated under the shared L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } protocol, SAKE is the strongest overall matched-budget low-cost selector among the evalu-ated methods, achieving 67.8% Exact, 91.7% Within-1, 6.1% mean regret@knee, and a cost ratio of 0.051 (94.9% normalized search-cost savings). 

1 Introduction 

Autoregressive neural simulators for PDEs predict the evolution of physical fields by advancing one time step at a time from a finite history of past states [ 1, 2]. In this setting, choosing the context window length is a fundamental yet surprisingly under-studied problem: the window determines how much temporal information the simulator receives, but also how much training, evaluation, and tuning cost must be paid. Existing work typically fixes this window as a task-specific hyperparameter or a priori [ 3, 1], or folds it implicitly into memory-based architectures [ 4]. Other work examines its effect only through ablations, rather than treating context-window selection itself as an independent optimization problem [ 5, 6 ]. As a result, a basic question remains open: can we identify the performance-critical window for a given autoregressive neural simulator without paying the cost of exhaustive search? The problem is challenging because the best window depends jointly on the underlying system dynamics, the simulator architecture, and the downstream rollout objective. More broadly, context-window selection has been studied in time-series forecasting, where existing approaches can be roughly grouped into three families [ 11 ]. The first is exhaustive validation over candidate windows [ 11 ]. The second is direct low-cost search, which replaces full evaluation with cheap pilots, early stopping, or multi-fidelity resource allocation over a generic shortlist of candidate windows [ 12 , 13 , 17 – 19 ]. The third is system-theoretic memory estimation, which infers a characteristic memory or embedding scale from the underlying dynamics and uses it to choose or bracket plausible windows [ 14 , 15 , 20 , 16 ]. Yet none of them fully addresses our setting. Exhaustive 

> ∗Corresponding author. Preprint.
> arXiv:2603.25025v1 [cs.AI] 26 Mar 2026

validation is accurate but expensive [ 11 ]; direct search is cheaper but often system-agnostic and brittle [ 12 , 13 ]; and memory estimates are physically meaningful but do not directly determine the window that optimizes downstream rollout performance in neural PDE simulators [14–16]. We therefore formalize explicit context-window selection for autoregressive neural PDE simulators as an independent low-cost algorithmic problem, and propose System-Anchored Knee Estimation (SAKE) . SAKE is a two-stage method. It first extracts physically interpretable system anchors from clean-system dynamics to identify a small but structured region of plausible windows. It then performs knee-aware downstream selection only within this anchor-induced candidate set, using a small number of task-level evaluations to choose the final window. By coupling system priors with lightweight downstream selection, SAKE avoids both the cost of exhaustive sweeps and the brittleness of generic low-cost search, providing a more reliable and efficient way to determine performance-critical context windows. We evaluate SAKE on two representative PDEBench tasks, four autoregressive simulator backbones, and three training seeds in the main body, and complement these case-level results with an appendix-wide aggregate over all eight PDEBench families under a shared L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } protocol. Across this fixed-window setting, we measure exact oracle-knee recovery, absolute window error, regret at the knee, and search cost. The aggregate results show that SAKE has the strongest overall matched-budget profile among the compared selectors in this scope: it achieves 67.8% Exact, 91.7% Within-1, 6.1% mean regret@knee, and a 0.051 cost ratio, outperforming the generic shortlist and ASHA baselines without using a larger search budget. These gains do not come from more aggressive search. Instead, they come from coupling system-informed anchors with lightweight downstream selection. In summary, the contributions of this paper are: • We are the first to formalize explicit context-window selection for autoregressive neural PDE simulators as an independent low-cost algorithmic problem. This problem is important because exhaustive context-window tuning can be computationally expensive in practice. • We propose SAKE, a two-stage method that combines physically interpretable system anchors with knee-aware downstream selection. • We empirically validate the effectiveness of SAKE across multiple PDE datasets, simulator backbones, and training seeds. In the fixed-window autoregressive setting studied here, SAKE provides a more reliable and efficient low-cost selector of context windows than the generic shortlist baselines considered in the main text. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Temporal dependence and historical information in neural simulators 

Recent work on time-dependent neural PDE solvers increasingly treats temporal dependence as a central challenge rather than a secondary implementation detail. Standard neural operators have been found to struggle with temporal dynamics beyond the horizons seen during training, architecture papers now target time-evolving dynamics directly, long-rollout studies make stable temporal pre-diction a primary concern, and recent benchmarks explicitly emphasize rollout metrics for temporal generalization [ 8, 9, 6 , 10 ]. This importance of historical information is made especially explicit by 

On the Benefits of Memory for Modeling Time-Dependent PDEs , which points out that many existing approaches are effectively Markovian and shows that using past states can substantially improve performance when the system is partially observed, noisy, or rich in high-frequency content [ 4]. Yet, despite this growing recognition, historical information is still usually handled implicitly rather than selected explicitly: many methods condition on only the current state or immediate past state, while others absorb memory into a dedicated architecture instead of treating the amount of accessible history as a separate modeling decision [ 4, 8]. When the role of history is examined more directly, it is typically through architecture ablations, rollout-strategy studies, or benchmark analyses aimed at temporal extrapolation and stability, rather than through a procedure that explicitly selects a context window for a fixed autoregressive neural simulator [8, 6, 10]. The gap, therefore, is not that prior work ignores temporal context; rather, it has not isolated explicit context-window selection as a standalone algorithmic problem. Existing work usually fixes history as part of the modeling setup, bakes it into a memory-aware architecture, or studies it only through ablations and rollout analyses, whereas our work makes the choice of context window itself the object 2of study [ 4, 8, 6, 10 ]. In particular, the present paper focuses on fixed-window one-step autoregressive simulators, treating adaptive-memory or internally stateful architectures as a complementary design direction rather than as direct selector baselines. 

2.2 Methodological perspectives on explicit context-window selection 

From an abstract viewpoint, deciding how many past observations to expose to a predictor is a classical issue in time-series forecasting, where the choice of input lags can substantially affect predictive performance [ 11 ]. Existing methods that could in principle be brought to bear on this problem can be broadly grouped into three families. A first family is exhaustive validation , which treats context length as an ordinary hyperparameter and estimates downstream performance for every candidate window by full training and validation [ 11 ]. A second family is direct low-cost search , which replaces full evaluation with cheap pilots, early stopping, or multi-fidelity resource allocation over a generic shortlist of candidate windows [ 12 , 13 , 17 – 19 ]. A third family is system-theoretic memory estimation ,which infers a characteristic memory or embedding scale directly from the observed dynamics and uses that estimate to choose or bracket a plausible context window [14, 15, 20, 16]. However, none of these families is satisfactory for explicit context-window selection in autoregressive neural simulators. Exhaustive validation optimizes downstream rollout quality, but requires a full sweep over candidate windows. Direct low-cost search reduces this cost, but remains largely system-agnostic and can miss small-window knees or plateau-side anchors important for rollout quality. System-theoretic estimators provide physically meaningful priors, but a system-level memory scale need not match the model-dependent rollout knee under finite data and training budgets. SAKE addresses this gap by combining the strengths of the latter two views: it uses system dynamics to construct a tiny, physically interpretable anchor set, then performs low-cost downstream selection only within that compressed space, targeting the rollout knee more efficiently than exhaustive search. 

3 Low-Cost Context-Window Selection 

We first formalize low-cost context-window selection for autoregressive neural simulators in Sec-tion 3.1, and then introduce System-Anchored Knee Estimation (SAKE) in Section 3.2. 

3.1 Problem formulation 

Let L ⊂ N denote a discrete candidate set of context-window lengths, and let f (L) 

> θ

be a one-step autoregressive neural simulator with history length L, i.e., 

ˆxt+1 = f (L) 

> θ

(xt−L+1: t).

For each L ∈ L , let M (L) denote the downstream rollout error obtained after training and evaluating the simulator under the full protocol with window length L. The full-information optimal window is 

Lbest = arg min  

> L∈L

M (L).

In cost-aware settings, however, the more practical target is often not the absolute best window, but the smallest near-optimal one. We therefore define the oracle knee as 

Lknee = min {L ∈ L : M (L) ≤ (1 + ϵ) M (Lbest )} ,

where ϵ > 0 is a tolerance parameter. This quantity captures the earliest point beyond which enlarging the context window yields only marginal improvements in downstream rollout performance. We refer to it as an oracle quantity because identifying it exactly requires access to the full performance curve 

M (L) over all candidate windows. In practice, the empirical sections below report the default setting 

ϵ = 0 .05 and separately examine stricter and looser knee definitions. The challenge is that M (L) is unknown a priori, and estimating it for every L ∈ L requires an exhaustive sweep in which each candidate window is trained and evaluated under the full protocol. We therefore study low-cost context-window selection : given a budget far smaller than a full sweep, select a window Lsel ∈ L that approximates Lknee as closely as possible. Formally, a selector A may use only inexpensive information, such as cheap pilot evaluations or system-level statistics, and must operate under a search-cost constraint, 

min  

> A

ℓ(Lsel , L knee ) s.t. C(A) ≤ B, B ≪ |L| ,

3Algorithm 1 System-Anchored Knee Estimation 

Require: Candidate window set L with minimum Lmin and maximum Lmax , clean-system trajecto-ries Dsys , autoregressive simulator family f (L)

> θ

Ensure: Selected context window Lsel ∈ L  

> 1:

Estimate the system anchors (Lcore , L plateau ) from Dsys  

> 2:

Form the initial anchor shortlist 

S0 ← { Lmin , L core , L plateau } 

> 3:

Train cheap pilot models on S0 and compute coarse downstream scores  

> 4:

Build a refined candidate set by taking promising pilot candidates, adding local grid neighbors, and retaining the boundary anchors  

> 5:

Train stronger pilots on the refined set and compute knee-aware downstream scores  

> 6:

Apply a knee-aware final rule and return the smallest statistically indistinguishable window after clear saturation  

> 7:

return Lsel 

where Lsel = A(·), C(A) denotes search cost, and ℓ(·, ·) measures selection quality, for example absolute window error or regret relative to the knee. This formulation separates the target of interest, the oracle knee, from the algorithmic question of how to recover it efficiently. The central difficulty is to compress the candidate space using low-cost information without discarding the performance-critical window. In the next subsection, we address this problem with SAKE. 

3.2 System-Anchored Knee Estimation 

In this subsection, we first outline the workflow of SAKE in Section 3.2.1, then detail the first part of SAKE: system-anchor construction in Section 3.2.2, and the second part of SAKE: knee-aware downstream selection in Section 3.2.3. 

3.2.1 Overall workflow 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the workflow of SAKE. The method has two parts with distinct roles. The first part is system anchoring : before training candidate simulators across the entire grid, SAKE extracts a small number of physically interpretable reference windows from clean-system dynamics and uses them to compress the candidate space. This step is intentionally informative but not final, because system memory alone does not determine the realized oracle knee of a particular trained backbone. The second part is downstream knee-aware selection : SAKE then performs a model-specific low-cost search, but only within the anchored region rather than over the full candidate grid. In this way, the first stage contributes a reliable search scaffold, while the second stage restores the backbone- and training-dependent specificity needed for final selection. 

3.2.2 System-anchor construction from clean-system dynamics 

The first stage identifies a small region of plausible context windows before any expensive downstream sweep. It uses only clean-system dynamics and is backbone-agnostic: the goal is not to predict the final window directly, but to provide a compact, physically interpretable scaffold for the relevant part of the downstream performance curve. The intended use case is simulator-rich or benchmarked settings where clean or sufficiently denoised full-state trajectories are available for anchor extraction; later sections examine how this stage degrades under noisier and less complete inputs. Concretely, we summarize the clean trajectories in a low-dimensional state representation and, for each candidate window length L ∈ L , fit a lightweight linear autoregressive model on that representation. In the experiments below, the default summary is a randomized PCA projection of normalized coarsened fields, retaining 99% explained variance with at most 64 components, and the lightweight dynamics model is a ridge VAR( L) with regularization 10 −3. This yields a backbone-independent validation risk curve, denoted by Rsys (L), which measures how much system-level predictive error remains when the clean dynamics are modeled with history length L.4From this curve, SAKE extracts two anchors. The first is a core anchor, which marks the earliest point at which the long-history tail error is already small. Let 

Tsys (L) = Rsys (L) − Rsys (Lmax ), εsys = ρ Rsys (Lmin ) − Rsys (Lmax ),

where ρ ∈ (0 , 1) is a fixed tolerance fraction. Using an upper confidence bound to avoid optimistic early stopping, we define 

Lcore = min L ∈ L : UCB  Tsys (L) ≤ εsys .

Thus, Lcore is the earliest window whose residual gap to the longest-context reference is small. The second is a plateau anchor, which marks the onset of diminishing returns. Let L+ denote the next larger candidate after L, and define the relative gain 

Grel (L) = Rsys (L) − Rsys (L+)max {Rsys (L), 10 −12 } .

We then set 

Lplateau = min L ∈ L : L ≥ Lcore and UCB  Grel (L) ≤ τpl ,

with fallback to Lmax if no such L exists. Intuitively, Lplateau is the first point beyond the core region where adding more history appears to bring only minor further improvement. We then form the initial shortlist 

S0 = {Lmin , L core , L plateau }.

Each element serves a distinct purpose: Lmin keeps the low-history hypothesis alive, Lcore provides a system-informed reference, and Lplateau supplies an upper bracket beyond which additional context is unlikely to be worthwhile. Throughout the paper, the stage-one uncertainty terms are one-sided 

95% bootstrap upper confidence bounds computed from 300 resamples; Appendix C gives the exact protocol and corresponding sensitivity study. 

3.2.3 Knee-aware downstream selection in the anchored candidate set 

The second stage turns the anchored shortlist into a model-specific selector. This step is necessary because the realized knee depends on the simulator backbone, optimization trajectory, and rollout metric as well as the underlying system. In short, the first stage tells us where to look ; the second stage determines which window to output .We begin with a coarse pilot pass on the initial shortlist S0. For each L ∈ S 0, we train a cheap pilot model and compute a coarse downstream score s(1) (L) from short validation rollouts. This score is used only for ranking. Let Ttop ⊆ S 0 denote the top-ranked candidates. SAKE then expands locally around them on the ordered candidate grid while retaining the boundary anchors. Writing Nh(L) for the h-hop neighborhood of L on L, the refined candidate set is 

S1 =

 [

> L∈T top

Nh(L)

 ∪ { Lmin , L plateau }.

This refinement lets the downstream selector correct the system prior locally rather than committing to the anchors themselves, while still keeping the search budget small. We next run a stronger second pilot pass on S1. For each refined candidate L, we compute a small set of diagnostics, including the average rollout error m(L), the terminal rollout error u(L), the variability across rollout anchors v(L), and, when available, an asymptotic proxy a(L) from the pilot trajectory. After normalizing these quantities over S1, we combine them into a stage-two score 

q(L) = α



wmean ˜m(L) + wterm ˜u(L) + wstd ˜v(L)



+ (1 − α)˜ a(L),

where lower is better. In the default selector, the initial shortlist is expanded with top-2 local refinement ( h = 1 ) and the refined set is capped at six candidates; the score uses one fixed global blend of normalized mean, terminal, variability, and asymptotic diagnostics rather than per-backbone retuning. This score is designed to be knee-aware rather than pilot-best-aware: it rewards good rollout quality, penalizes brittle candidates, and avoids over-trusting noisy early pilot signals. 5Finally, SAKE converts the refined score curve into a knee-oriented window choice. Ordering the refined candidates as L1 < · · · < L M and writing qj = q(Lj ), SAKE first identifies the earliest index r after which the score curve has clearly saturated, meaning that adjacent gains are already small and the remaining gap to the best refined score q⋆ = min j qj is also small. It then returns the smallest candidate up to that frontier whose score is statistically indistinguishable from the best refined score: 

Lsel = min {Lj : j ≤ r and qj ≤ q⋆ + κ SE( q⋆)} ,

where SE( q⋆) is the estimated standard error of the best refined score and κ > 0 is a fixed multiplier. Operationally, the saturation frontier is the first refined index after which both the local gain and the remaining gap to the best score are below fixed 0.15 fractions, and the default selector uses κ = 1 .5.If no earlier candidate satisfies this condition, SAKE falls back to the frontier candidate itself. This rule aligns the selector with the oracle knee defined in Section 3.1 by preferring the smallest reliable window once further gains have become negligible. 

4 Empirical Evaluation 

Our experiments address two questions: whether SAKE improves context-window selection for PDE forecasting, and whether both the system anchor prior and its downstream coupling are necessary. 

4.1 Experimental setup 4.1.1 Datasets 

We evaluate on two PDEBench forward tasks chosen to span distinct physical regimes and boundary conditions rather than multiple variants of the same PDE family [ 7]. Specifically, diff-react is a 2D two-field reaction–diffusion system with Neumann boundaries, and rdb is the radial-dam-break instance of PDEBench’s 2D shallow-water benchmark, representing hyperbolic free-surface dynamics with shock-capable wave propagation. According to PDEBench, both tasks comprise 1,000 trajectories [ 7 ]. Their benchmark resolutions are both 128 × 128 , and both contain 100 temporal evolution steps (equivalently 101 stored snapshots when counting the initial frame). diff-react 

contains two channels (u, v ), whereas rdb is a single-channel scalar-field prediction task. These two tasks are shown in the body because they expose two contrasting knee structures—a broad-plateau reaction system and a small-knee shock-capable flow case—while keeping the case-level tables compact. Appendix A reports the corresponding all-PDE aggregate and per-family tables for the remaining PDEBench forward families under the same shared L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } protocol. 

4.1.2 Baseline selection and implementation details 

We evaluate four standard PDE-surrogate backbones—U-Net, Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), ConvLSTM, and Transformer—as one-step autoregressive predictors with variable history length on a shared candidate grid L ∈ L = {1, . . . , 16 }. The body reports representative case-level tables on the two main PDEBench tasks, while Appendix B summarizes the four architectures under the shared training protocol used throughout the paper. Following Section 2.2, the body reports representative baselines from the three most relevant method families. For exhaustive validation methods , we report full-sweep oracle-best and oracle-knee as unattainable reference targets. For direct low-cost search methods , we use Direct-4-Shortlist (D4-Shortlist) , which applies the same downstream pilot budget and local selection rule to a generic uniformly spaced four-point shortlist without any system prior, and Direct-3-Shortlist (D3-Shortlist) ,which serves as a lighter generic-search reference in the representative case tables. For system-theoretic memory estimators , we use System-core , which directly returns Lcore from the clean-system memory estimate. Appendix A additionally reports ASHA [ 13 ] as a stronger generic multi-fidelity baseline in the all-PDE aggregate under the same shared L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } protocol. All experiments were conducted on a server with four NVIDIA A100 (80GB) GPUs, using PyTorch 2.1 and CUDA 12.0. Across all backbones, we use Adam ( lr = 3 × 10 −4, weight _decay = 0 ), automatic mixed precision, batch size 16, gradient clipping with max _norm = 0 .5, normalized-space output clamping to [−10 , 10] , residual ( ∆-prediction) training, and a trajectory-level 0.8/0.1/0.1 train/validation/test split, corresponding to 800/100/100 trajectories per dataset. Pilot runs always 6subsample from the fixed 800/100 training/validation partitions and keep the same 100-trajectory test partition untouched. The full-protocol oracle runs use a 32-step training rollout horizon, scheduled sampling with final probability 0.50, 20 training epochs, and rollout-based checkpoint selection every epoch using a short validation rollout horizon of 8 on up to 8 validation trajectories; all aggregate results are averaged over three training seeds {0, 1, 2}.The selector itself uses one fixed set of stage-wise budgets and decision thresholds across datasets and backbones; Appendix C records these settings and the matched-budget relationship between SAKE and the direct-search baselines. Appendices D, E, and F report robustness to noisy or proxy anchors, alternative state summaries, and moderate changes in the fixed thresholds, bootstrap size, and knee tolerance. 

4.1.3 Experiment procedure and metrics Effectiveness : For each dataset–backbone–seed case, we run each selector to obtain a recommended window Lsel , and separately run a full sweep over the candidate set L = {1, . . . , 16 } to construct the oracle reference. Let M (L) denote the full-protocol rollout relative L2 of the model trained with window length L. We define 

Lbest = arg min  

> L∈L

M (L), Lknee = min {L ∈ L : M (L) ≤ 1.05 M (Lbest )},

where Lbest is the metric-optimal window under the full protocol and Lknee is the smallest window within 5% of that optimum. Given Lsel , we report Exact = ⊮[Lsel = Lknee ], Within-1 = ⊮[|Lsel −

Lknee | ≤ 1] , mean absolute window error |∆L| = |Lsel − Lknee |, and the rollout regrets 

Regret knee = M (Lsel ) − M (Lknee )

M (Lknee ) , Regret best = M (Lsel ) − M (Lbest )

M (Lbest ) .

To quantify computation, we record the full-sweep-equivalent training cost of every pilot-evaluated window. If a candidate window L is trained for Epilot  

> L

epochs using N pilot  

> L

training pairs, while a full run uses Efull epochs and N full  

> L

training pairs, then its normalized cost is 

c(L) = Epilot 

> L

Efull · N pilot 

> L

N full 

> L

.

Let Seval be the set of candidate windows actually trained by the selector. The total selector cost is 

Csel = P 

> L∈Seval

c(L), while the full sweep has cost Cfull = |L| . We therefore report 

CostRatio = Csel 

Cfull 

, Saving = 1 − CostRatio .

Because all methods share the same hardware, optimizer, and backbone training protocol, this full-sweep-equivalent cost is a protocol-normalized measure of selector work, but not a substitute for realized runtime. Appendix G therefore also reports selector wall-clock time and GPU-hours, which follow the same qualitative ranking while making the practical savings explicit. Unless otherwise stated, all knee-based metrics use ϵ = 5% ; Appendix F reports the same evaluations for stricter and looser knee tolerances. All aggregate results are averaged over three training seeds. 

Necessity : The ablation study asks whether SAKE requires both a system-derived anchor prior and a downstream low-cost selector. For each case, the clean-system estimator first returns Lcore and 

Lplateau , from which SAKE forms the initial anchor set S0 = {1, L core , L plateau }. After the cheap coarse pilot, the method expands to a refined candidate set S1 for stage-two evaluation. We then report system-band coverage ⊮[Lknee ∈ [Lcore , L plateau ]] , initial coverage ⊮[Lknee ∈ S 0], and final coverage ⊮[Lknee ∈ S 1], together with the mean number of unique evaluated windows and the same cost ratio defined above. These metrics test, respectively, whether the system prior brackets the oracle knee, whether the initial anchors preserve it, and whether the downstream selector can recover it without reverting to exhaustive search. 

4.2 Main results 4.2.1 Effectiveness of System-Anchored Knee Estimation 

We first examine the complete case-level selection results. Table 1 reports the selected window Lsel 

for all baselines together with the oracle references on both datasets. This view is important because 7Table 1: Complete full-oracle case-level selection results under the three-seed protocol. Panels (a)–(b) report the selected window Lsel for all baselines together with the oracle references. Bold indicates an exact match to the oracle knee.                                                               

> (a) DiffReact: selected window Lsel
> Backbone System-core D3-Shortlist D4-Shortlist SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best
> ConvLSTM 332222FNO 322222Transformer 312113U-Net 355455
> (b) RDB: selected window Lsel
> Backbone System-core D3-Shortlist D4-Shortlist SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best
> ConvLSTM 244455FNO 244444Transformer 255555U-Net 223112

Table 2: Complete full-oracle case-level Regret knee results under the three-seed protocol (%, lower is better). Bold indicates the lowest regret in the row. Negative regret is possible because Lknee is the smallest near-optimal window rather than the metric minimizer.                                             

> (c) DiffReact: Regret knee (%) Backbone System-core D3-Shortlist D4-Shortlist SAKE
> ConvLSTM 43.3 43.3 0.0 0.0
> FNO 4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0
> Transformer -0.8 0.0 0.4 0.0 U-Net 23.3 0.0 0.0 6.7
> (d) RDB: Regret knee (%) Backbone System-core D3-Shortlist D4-Shortlist SAKE
> ConvLSTM 169.0 47.2 47.2 47.2
> FNO 113.8 0.0 0.0 0.0
> Transformer 45.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
> U-Net -0.9 -0.9 36.4 0.0

SAKE aims not merely to improve an average score, but to place the search on the right part of the window-length axis before the final low-cost selector is applied. The selected-window table already shows the main pattern. Across the eight dataset–backbone settings, SAKE exactly matches the oracle knee in 6/8 cases, compared with 5/8 for both Direct-3-Shortlist and Direct-4-Shortlist, and 0/8 for System-core. Its mean absolute window error is also the smallest at 0.25 , versus 0.375 for Direct-3-Shortlist, 0.50 for Direct-4-Shortlist, and 1.875 for System-core. More importantly, these gains are not obtained by dominating every row. On DiffReact, the three low-cost search methods are competitive but fail in different places: Direct-3-Shortlist misses ConvLSTM, Direct-4-Shortlist misses Transformer, and SAKE misses U-Net by one window. On RDB, however, the advantage of the system prior becomes much clearer: SAKE exactly recovers the difficult small-knee U-Net case (Lknee = 1) , while the generic direct baselines over-select it, and all three low-cost methods share the same remaining miss on ConvLSTM. This is the behavior we want from SAKE: not row-wise dominance, but a better-placed candidate space that avoids the most consequential generic-search failures. Discrete agreement with Lknee is only part of the story, since a slightly larger window can still yield nearly identical rollout quality. Table 2 therefore reports the corresponding Regret knee , which is the more important metric for judging whether a miss is harmful. The regret table makes two points clear. First, SAKE has the best overall regret profile among the evaluated matched-budget low-cost selectors in the main experiment: its mean Regret knee over the eight dataset–backbone settings is 6.7% , compared with 11 .2% for Direct-3-Shortlist and 10 .5% 

for Direct-4-Shortlist. Second, this advantage comes from removing large generic-search mistakes rather than from uniformly winning every case. For example, Direct-3-Shortlist remains essentially harmless on RDB/U-Net despite missing the exact knee, because L = 2 is slightly better than the smallest near-optimal knee in rollout quality. Conversely, SAKE avoids the large-regret failures that drive up the direct baselines, most notably Direct-3-Shortlist on DiffReact/ConvLSTM and Direct-4-Shortlist on RDB/U-Net, while tying them on the easy cases. The one failure mode that remains unsolved for all low-cost selectors is RDB/ConvLSTM, where every method selects L = 4 

and incurs the same 47 .2% regret. Thus, the value of SAKE is not that it solves every difficult row, but that it makes the search substantially more reliable in the cases where a generic shortlist is most brittle. Across all eight PDEBench families evaluated under the shared L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } protocol, the aggregate summary in Appendix A shows the same ordering: SAKE attains 67.8% Exact, 91.7% Within-1, 6.1% mean Regret knee , 5.3 mean unique L evaluations, and a 0.051 cost ratio. Together, the two representative case-level tables support the main claim of this subsection: System-Anchored Knee Estimation improves low-cost context-window selection for PDE forecasting, and the appendix-wide aggregate shows that this advantage persists beyond the two main-text PDEs. 8Dataset Lcore Lplateau System band Knee-in-band coverage Covered oracle-knee models DiffReact 3 6 [3, 4, 5, 6] 25.0% UNet RDB 2 6 [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] 75.0% ConvLSTM, FNO, Transformer 

Table 3: Dataset-level outputs of the system anchor estimator. Its role is to provide anchors and brackets for the downstream selector, rather than to directly serve as the final recommender. 

4.2.2 Necessity of components of System-Anchored Knee Estimation 

We now ask whether the gain of SAKE truly requires both of its components: a system-derived anchor prior and a downstream low-cost selector. Table 3 summarizes what the system stage provides before any model-specific search is performed. The system-derived prior is necessary, but not sufficient by itself. Table 3 shows that the system stage does capture meaningful structure: on both datasets it produces a small, interpretable band that already contains a nontrivial fraction of oracle knees. At the same time, this band is clearly incomplete, especially on DiffReact where its coverage is only 25 .0% . This explains why System-core 

is not competitive as a final selector. In Table 1, it never exactly matches the oracle knee, and in Table 2 it frequently incurs large regret. Thus, the system estimator should not be viewed as a direct predictor of the final window length; its role is to provide a physically meaningful scaffold for the downstream search. The downstream low-cost selector is also necessary, but a generic downstream selector alone is not enough. Relative to the direct-search baselines, SAKE yields the smallest mean absolute window error in Table 1 and the best overall regret profile in Table 2. This gain does not come from searching more aggressively: SAKE still avoids some of the most consequential generic-search failures, most notably the small-knee RDB/U-Net case. This shows that a strong low-cost selector operating on a generic shortlist is still brittle when the candidate space is poorly placed; the system prior is what makes the downstream search focus on the right part of the window-length axis. Taken together, these results show that the two components play distinct and complementary roles. The system stage alone provides useful but incomplete structure, while the downstream selector alone provides flexibility but remains prone to generic-search errors. SAKE is effective because it couples the two: the system-derived anchors compress the search into a small and meaningful candidate space, and the downstream selector resolves the remaining model-dependent trade-off near the oracle knee. This is precisely the combination needed to make low-cost context-window selection both reliable and efficient. 

5 Discussion 

This paper formalizes explicit context-window selection for autoregressive neural PDE simulators as an independent low-cost algorithmic problem and introduces SAKE, a two-stage method combining system-derived anchors with knee-aware downstream selection. Across the evaluated fixed-window autoregressive regime, SAKE delivers the strongest matched-budget selection profile among the compared methods, with more reliable oracle-knee recovery, lower downstream regret, and lower selector cost than generic shortlist baselines. The main body focuses on two representative case-level tables, while Appendix A reports aggregate L ∈ { 1, . . . , 16 } results over all eight PDEBench families and per-family tables for the remaining six tasks; the other appendices cover noisy or partially observed anchor inputs, proxy anchors without a separate clean pool, alternative state summaries, alternative knee tolerances, and practical timing measurements. We view this as important for two reasons. First, context window is a consequential design choice, yet it is often treated only as a fixed modeling setting or tuning detail. Second, in neural PDE simulation, selecting the window is expensive because each candidate may require substantial retraining and rollout evaluation. By making this problem explicit and showing it can be solved much more efficiently, our results suggest that context-window selection should be treated as a first-class algorithmic component rather than a routine hyperparameter sweep. The study nevertheless remains deliberately scoped to fixed-window one-step autoregressive simula-tors rather than adaptive-memory or internally stateful architectures. The anchor stage is most reliable when at least a usable full-state or proxy state summary can be extracted, although the degradation 9studies suggest that this failure mode is usually gradual rather than catastrophic. Finally, the shared hard case RDB/ConvLSTM indicates that some rollout knees remain difficult to localize even with a system prior, especially when pilot and full-training behavior diverge. SAKE should therefore be read as a fixed-rule, system-aware selector for a controlled but practically important regime, and as complementary to architectural remedies that internalize memory rather than select it explicitly. 

References 

[1] McCabe, M., et al. (2024). Multiple physics pretraining for spatiotemporal surrogate models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37, 119301–119335. [2] Hao, Z., et al. (2024). DPOT: Auto-regressive denoising operator transformer for large-scale PDE pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.03542 .[3] Li, Z., et al. (2020). Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 .[4] Ruiz, R. B., et al. (2024). On the benefits of memory for modeling time-dependent PDEs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02313 .[5] Tran, A., et al. (2021). Factorized Fourier neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.13802 .[6] Lippe, P., et al. (2023). PDE-refiner: Achieving accurate long rollouts with neural PDE solvers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 67398–67433. [7] Takamoto, M., Praditia, T., Leiteritz, R., MacKinlay, D., Alesiani, F., Pflüger, D., & Niepert, M. (2022). PDEBench: An Extensive Benchmark for Scientific Machine Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 35, pp. 1596–1611. [8] Diab, W., & Al Kobaisi, M. (2025). Temporal Neural Operator for Modeling Time-Dependent Physical Phenomena. Scientific Reports , 15(1), 32791. [9] Zhang, X., et al. (2024). SineNet: Learning Temporal Dynamics in Time-Dependent Partial Differential Equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19507. [10] Koehler, F., et al. (2024). APEBench: A Benchmark for Autoregressive Neural Emulators of PDEs. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 37, pp. 120252–120310. [11] Leites, J., Cerqueira, V., & Soares, C. (2024). Lag Selection for Univariate Time Series Forecasting using Deep Learning: An Empirical Study. In EPIA Conference on Artificial Intelligence . Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. [12] Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A., & Talwalkar, A. (2018). Hyperband: A Novel Bandit-Based Approach to Hyperparameter Optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(185), 1–52. [13] Li, Liam, et al. A system for massively parallel hyperparameter tuning. Proceedings of machine learning and systems 2 (2020): 230–246. [14] Takens, F. (2006). Detecting Strange Attractors in Turbulence. In Dynamical Systems and Turbulence, Warwick 1980: Proceedings of a Symposium Held at the University of Warwick 1979/80 . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. [15] Fraser, Andrew M., and Harry L. Swinney. Independent coordinates for strange attractors from mutual information. Physical review A 33.2 (1986): 1134. [16] Cao, Liangyue. Practical method for determining the minimum embedding dimension of a scalar time series. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 110.1–2 (1997): 43–50. [17] Snoek, Jasper, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems 25 (2012). [18] Kandasamy, Kirthevasan, et al. Multi-fidelity bayesian optimisation with continuous approximations. 

International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2017. [19] Falkner, Stefan, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: Robust and efficient hyperparameter optimization at scale. International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2018. 

10 [20] Kennel, Matthew B., Reggie Brown, and Henry DI Abarbanel. Determining embedding dimension for phase-space reconstruction using a geometrical construction. Physical review A 45.6 (1992): 3403. [21] Diab, W., & Al Kobaisi, M. (2025). Temporal Neural Operator for Modeling Time-Dependent Physical Phenomena. Scientific Reports , 15(1), 32791. 

11 Contents of Appendices 

A Broader PDEBench Coverage Beyond the Representative Main-Text Pair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 B Backbone Architectures and Shared Training Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 C Implementation Details and Hyperparameters of System-Anchored Knee Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 D Anchor Robustness Under Noisy and Partially Observed Trajectories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 E Anchor Proxies Without a Separate Clean-System Pool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 F Sensitivity to Selector Hyperparameters and Knee Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 G Practical Timing: Wall-Clock and GPU-Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 H Detailed Clarification of Large Language Models Usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

12 Component Setting used in this appendix                  

> Candidate grid L={1, . . . , 16 }, matching the shared main protocol Additional PDEBench families 1D advection, 1D Burgers, 1D diffusion–sorption, 2D Darcy flow, 2D incompressible Navier–Stokes, 2D compressible Navier–Stokes Backbones / seeds Same four one-step autoregressive backbones and same three-seed protocol as the main paper Methods System-core, Direct-4-Shortlist, ASHA, and SAKE under matched downstream budgets Oracle construction Full sweep over {1, . . . , 16 }for each dataset–backbone–seed case Reported metrics Exact, Within-1, mean |∆L|,Regret knee ,Regret best , mean unique Levaluations, and cost ratio

Table 4: Protocol for the broader PDEBench extension. The representative main-text pair is kept for compact case-wise discussion, while this appendix tests whether the same matched-budget ordering survives on the full PDE family suite under the shared main protocol. 

Method Exact Within-1 Mean Regret knee Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

System-core 12.5% 40.6% 28.0% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 84.4% 9.4% 7.3 0.072 ASHA 57.3% 88.0% 8.0% 9.6 0.092 SAKE 67.8% 91.7% 6.1% 5.3 0.051 

Table 5: Overall aggregate effectiveness across all eight PDEBench families evaluated under the shared L = {1, . . . , 16 } protocol. The representative main-text pair is included in this aggregate; the per-family tables below report only the six additional families not shown in the body. 

A Broader PDEBench Coverage Beyond the Representative Main-Text Pair 

This appendix broadens the matched-budget evaluation beyond the two representative tasks shown in the body. The purpose is not to replace the case-level narrative of DiffReact and RDB, but to test whether the same selector ordering persists across the full PDE suite, which includes those two main-text tasks together with additional advection-dominated transport, stiff transport–reaction, heterogeneous elliptic, and Navier–Stokes-type families. 

A.1 Protocol A.2 Per-family result tables for the six additional families A.2.1 Advection : 1D advection-dominated transport A.2.2 Burgers : 1D viscous Burgers dynamics A.2.3 DiffusionSorption : 1D diffusion–sorption with slow–fast transport A.2.4 Darcy : 2D Darcy flow with heterogeneous coefficients A.2.5 IncompNS : 2D incompressible Navier–Stokes A.2.6 CompNS : 2D compressible Navier–Stokes 

Taken together, Table 5 and Tables 6–17 show not row-wise dominance on every family, but stability of the aggregate ordering. SAKE remains the strongest overall matched-budget selector across the full PDE suite; ASHA is the closest generic baseline; Direct-4-Shortlist remains competitive on easier later-knee cases but more brittle on earlier-knee or broader-plateau systems; and System-core stays informative but insufficient as a final recommender. In particular, the gap widens on the stiff and Navier–Stokes-like families, where the anchored compression matters more than on the simplest transport cases. 

B Backbone Architectures and Shared Training Protocol 

This appendix records the backbone-side implementation choices referred to in Section 4.1.2. The main comparison is meant to isolate context-window selection rather than backbone-specific training recipes, so all four backbones are instantiated as one-step autoregressive predictors under the same data split, optimizer, early-stopping rule, and rollout metric. Table 18 summarizes the architecture fields for each backbone, and Table 19 records the shared training and evaluation protocol used throughout the main experiments. The backbone appendix supports a simple interpretive point: the four model families differ in inductive bias, but they are compared under a common autoregressive pipeline. This keeps the selection results in Section 4.1.2 directly comparable across backbones rather than confounded by incompatible training setups. 

13 Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio                             

> System-core 25.0% 58.3% 1.25 17.6% 18.1% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 58.3% 91.7% 0.50 5.8% 6.4% 7.1 0.070 ASHA 66.7% 100.0% 0.42 4.9% 5.5% 9.2 0.089 SAKE 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 3.8% 4.4% 5.0 0.048

Table 6: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family Advection .

Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 4 4 4 4 4 5FNO 4 5 5 5 5 6Transformer 4 4 4 3 3 4U-Net 5 6 6 6 6 7

Table 7: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family Advection .

C Implementation Details and Hyperparameters of System-Anchored Knee Estimation 

This appendix records the stage-wise settings used by System-Anchored Knee Estimation and the matched-budget relationship to the direct-search baselines. The main text emphasizes the two-stage logic of the method rather than every implementation constant. The purpose of this appendix is therefore twofold: first, to specify the concrete settings behind the selector; second, to make clear that the main comparison is not driven by per-backbone retuning or by giving SAKE a larger downstream budget than the direct baselines. Taken together, Tables 20–22 make the comparison explicit: SAKE is not granted a larger search budget or a separate per-backbone tuning process. They also fix the exact generic-shortlist constructions used by the direct baselines, so the comparison is attributable to candidate placement and knee-aware coupling rather than to unreported baseline choices or extra downstream computation. 

D Anchor Robustness Under Noisy and Partially Observed Trajectories 

This appendix probes the clean-system assumption by changing only the trajectories used in stage one. The downstream pilot budgets, final decision rule, datasets, backbones, and oracle evaluation protocol are kept fixed; only the source used to estimate Lcore and Lplateau is altered. 

D.1 Perturbation protocol 

The robustness tables show that the anchor stage degrades gradually rather than catastrophically once ideal clean trajectories are removed. Mild-to-moderate corruption moves the anchors and selected windows only modestly, same-data full-state estimation stays close to the clean reference, and the main failure mode under harsher masking or noise is a delayed or widened anchor band rather than erratic selector behavior. The aggregate diagnostics average over all seed-level runs, whereas the case-level tables report the modal per-case summary; small nonzero mean anchor shifts can therefore remain even when the displayed modal case entry matches the clean reference. Even in these harsher settings, SAKE remains substantially stronger than returning the raw system anchor alone. 

E Anchor Proxies Without a Separate Clean-System Pool 

Appendix D changes the stage-one input quality while keeping the representation and anchor-extraction recipe fixed. The purpose of the present appendix is different: it studies settings in which a separate clean-system pool is unavailable and the low-dimensional summary itself must be chosen from imperfect or compressed observations. 

E.1 Protocol 

Tables 29–33 show that stage one remains usable well beyond the ideal clean-system setting, but with an interpretable degradation order. Same-data full-state stays closest to the clean reference; mild downsampling and 

14 Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio                             

> System-core 16.7% 50.0% 1.58 24.5% 25.1% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 83.3% 0.67 8.9% 9.6% 7.2 0.071 ASHA 58.3% 91.7% 0.58 7.4% 8.1% 9.3 0.090 SAKE 66.7% 91.7% 0.42 5.8% 6.5% 5.2 0.050

Table 8: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family Burgers .

Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 3 5 4 4 4 5FNO 4 5 5 5 5 6Transformer 4 4 4 4 4 5U-Net 4 4 4 3 3 4

Table 9: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family Burgers .

learned latent summaries remain nearly as stable; same-data noisy proxies and sparse probes introduce a clearer rightward drift; heavier masking is the most brittle observation condition; and random projection is the least stable representation of those tested. Across these settings, SAKE remains markedly stronger than returning the raw anchor alone and stays competitive with the clean-independent direct baselines even when the anchor source becomes imperfect. 

F Sensitivity to Selector Hyperparameters and Knee Tolerance 

This appendix studies two distinct types of sensitivity. The first concerns the fixed selector constants that define the anchor and final-decision heuristics. The second concerns the oracle-knee tolerance ϵ, which changes the target that the selector is asked to recover. The sensitivity analysis shows that the selector is not tuned to a knife-edge. Moderate changes in ρ, τpl , κ, and 

B move the anchor locations and selected windows only gradually, producing the observed conservative-versus-aggressive trade-off between coverage and cost without changing the overall ranking. Changing ϵ predictably moves the oracle knee itself leftward as the tolerance is relaxed, but the relative ranking between the principal selectors remains similar across practically relevant tolerances. 

G Practical Timing: Wall-Clock and GPU-Hours 

This appendix complements the normalized selector-cost metric from the main text with realized runtime measurements. The goal is not to replace the protocol-normalized cost ratio, but to show how closely it tracks end-to-end timing under the shared implementation. The timing tables verify that the normalized selector-cost metric used in the main text does not hide qualitatively different runtime behavior. SAKE remains the fastest matched-budget selector in both wall-clock time and GPU-hours, and the gap between normalized cost and realized runtime is modest. The stage-wise breakdown shows why: the stage-1 anchor overhead is smaller than the stage-2 search time that it avoids, so the practical runtime savings follow the same ordering as the normalized cost. 

H Detailed Clarification of Large Language Models Usage 

We declare that LLMs were employed exclusively to assist with the writing and presentation aspects of this paper. Specifically, we utilized LLMs for: (i) verification and refinement of technical terminology to ensure precise usage of domain-specific vocabulary; (ii) grammatical error detection and correction to enhance the clarity and readability of the manuscript; (iii) translation assistance from the authors’ native language to English, as we are non-native English speakers, to ensure accurate and fluent expression of scientific concepts; and (iv) improvement of sentence structure and flow while maintaining the original scientific content and meaning. We emphasize that LLMs were not used for research ideation, experimental design, data analysis, or any form of content generation that would constitute intellectual contribution to the scientific findings presented in this work. All scientific insights, methodological decisions, and analytical conclusions are the original work of the authors. The use of LLMs was limited to linguistic and presentational enhancement only, serving a role analogous to professional editing services. 

15 Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

System-core 8.3% 33.3% 2.08 31.8% 32.4% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 41.7% 83.3% 0.92 10.9% 11.7% 7.1 0.070 ASHA 50.0% 83.3% 0.75 8.8% 9.6% 9.5 0.092 SAKE 75.0% 91.7% 0.42 5.6% 6.3% 5.1 0.049 

Table 10: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family DiffusionSorption .

Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 2 3 3 3 3 4FNO 4 6 5 5 5 6Transformer 4 5 5 4 4 5U-Net 3 4 3 3 2 4

Table 11: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family DiffusionSorption .

Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

System-core 16.7% 41.7% 1.67 23.4% 24.0% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 83.3% 0.75 9.1% 9.8% 7.3 0.072 ASHA 58.3% 91.7% 0.58 7.8% 8.5% 9.4 0.091 SAKE 66.7% 91.7% 0.42 6.3% 7.0% 5.3 0.051 

Table 12: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family Darcy .

Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 4 4 4 4 4 5FNO 4 3 3 3 3 4Transformer 4 6 5 5 5 6U-Net 4 4 4 3 3 5

Table 13: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family Darcy .

Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

System-core 8.3% 33.3% 2.17 32.7% 33.4% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 83.3% 0.83 10.8% 11.5% 7.4 0.073 ASHA 58.3% 83.3% 0.67 9.3% 10.1% 9.7 0.094 SAKE 66.7% 91.7% 0.50 7.1% 7.9% 5.4 0.052 

Table 14: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family IncompNS .

Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 4 6 6 5 5 6FNO 4 6 6 6 6 7Transformer 4 5 4 4 4 6U-Net 4 4 4 3 3 5

Table 15: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family IncompNS .

Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

System-core 8.3% 33.3% 2.33 36.8% 37.5% 0.0 0.000 Direct-4-Shortlist 41.7% 75.0% 1.00 12.1% 12.9% 7.6 0.074 ASHA 50.0% 75.0% 0.83 10.6% 11.4% 9.9 0.096 SAKE 58.3% 83.3% 0.67 8.4% 9.2% 5.6 0.054 

Table 16: Aggregate effectiveness on the additional PDEBench family CompNS .16 Backbone System-core D4-Shortlist ASHA SAKE Oracle knee Oracle best 

ConvLSTM 4 7 6 6 5 7FNO 4 6 6 6 6 7Transformer 4 5 5 4 4 6U-Net 4 4 4 3 3 5

Table 17: Case-level selected windows on the additional PDEBench family CompNS .

Backbone Input/context encoding Core spatiotemporal block Output head Key hyperparameters Trainable parameters (DiffReact / RDB) U-Net causal temporal encoder over the full history TemporalEncoder + 2D U-Net C-channel next-step field decoder temporal hidden 32 , temporal layers 2, kernel 3, max context 8; U-Net base 32 , depth 3 1,946,212 / 1,945,826 FNO causal temporal encoder over the full history TemporalEncoder + 2D FNO C-channel spectral decoder temporal hidden 32 , temporal layers 2, kernel 3, max context 8; width 48 , modes 16 , depth 4 4,751,460 / 4,751,298 ConvLSTM raw frame sequence warm-up over the full history 1-layer ConvLSTM with hidden-state recurrence 1 × 1 conv to next-step field hidden channels 64 , layers 1, kernel 3 152,450 / 150,081 Transformer per-patch causal tokenization of the full history patchwise Transformer encoder linear patch reconstruction to field space patch size 8, dmodel = 96 , heads 4, depth 2 939,936 / 927,584 

Table 18: Backbone-specific architecture fields for the four one-step autoregressive simulators used in the main experiments. Trainable-parameter counts are exact for the default code instantiations at resolution 128 × 128 , reported as DiffReact / RDB because the two datasets have different channel counts. The purpose of this table is to make the backbone implementations explicit while keeping the selector comparison itself on a shared footing. 

Item Setting used in the main experiments Datasets DiffReact, RDB Candidate windows shared candidate grid L = {1, . . . , 16 } for the main-text and appendix evaluations Training seeds {0, 1, 2}

Split trajectory-level 0.8/0.1/0.1 train/validation/test split Optimizer Adam Learning rate 3 × 10 −4

Weight decay 0

Batch size 16 

Mixed precision yes Gradient clipping max _norm = 0 .5

Output stabilization normalized-space clamping to [−10 , 10] 

Prediction target residual ( ∆-prediction) training Scheduled sampling final probability 0.50 

Training rollout horizon 32 steps Full-oracle epochs 20 

Full-oracle early stopping disabled ( patience = 0 )Checkpoint selection rollout metric, evaluated every epoch with validation rollout horizon 8 on up to 8 validation trajectories Hardware 4 × NVIDIA A100 (80GB), PyTorch 2.1, CUDA 12.0 

Table 19: Shared training and evaluation protocol for all four backbones. These settings are held fixed so that differences in the main results reflect selector behavior rather than incompatible model pipelines. 

Stage-1 component Symbol / object Role in the method Setting used in the main experiments System representation PCA projector clean-system state summary randomized PCA on flattened normalized coarsened fields; 800 samples, 99% variance target, max 64 components Lightweight dynamics model ridge VAR( L) low-cost system-risk estimation one-step linear autoregressive model with ridge 10 −3 fit for each L ∈ L on the shared {1, . . . , 16 } grid used throughout the paper Long-history reference Lmax tail-risk reference window 16 under the shared main protocol Tail tolerance fraction ρ defines Lcore 0.05 

Plateau threshold τpl defines Lplateau relative-gain threshold 0.05 

Uncertainty estimate bootstrap UCB confidence control for anchor extraction 300 bootstrap resamples, confidence level 1 − α with α = 0 .05 

Initial anchor set S0 {1, L core , L plateau } deduplicated anchor shortlist on the active discrete grid; instantiated on the shared {1, . . . , 16 } grid throughout the paper 

Table 20: Stage-1 settings for system-anchor construction. The reported fields specify how the clean-system estimator is instantiated before any downstream simulator pilots are run. 

Stage-2 component Symbol / object Role in the method Setting used in the main experiments Coarse pilot budget stage-1 pilots first-pass ranking over S0 2 epochs; max 1024 train pairs; 8 train trajectories, 4 validation trajectories; rollout horizons 8/4 (train/val) with max 4 validation rollout trajectories Top-candidate count top-k number of refined seeds k = 2 

Neighborhood radius h local grid expansion around promising candidates h = 1 hop on the ordered window grid Refined candidate set S1 stage-two evaluation set union of top-2 neighborhoods, capped at 6 candidates, with smallest and largest anchors retained Stronger pilot budget stage-2 pilots second-pass evaluation budget 6 epochs; max 4096 train pairs; 24 train trajectories, 16 validation trajectories; rollout horizons 32 /16 (train/val) with max 8 validation rollout trajectories Rollout anchors Aeval multi-anchor validation used in stage two 4 rollout anchors per candidate Stage-two diagnostics q(L) terms mean / terminal / variability / asymptotic terms SAKE: normalized mean + terminal + std penalty blended with asymptotic rollout; direct baselines: normalized terminal + worst-anchor score Score weights fixed weights fixed combination weights in the refined score SAKE (wmean , w term , w worst , w std , α ) = (0 .75 , 0.25 , 0, 0.20 , 0.25) ; Directs (0 , 0.25 , 0.75 , 0, 1.0) 

Saturation thresholds frontier rule knee-aware frontier criteria local-adjacent fraction 0.15 , remaining-gain fraction 0.15 , consecutive-small count 1

One-standard-error multiplier κ smallest reliable-window rule 1.5 for SAKE; 1.0 for Direct-3-Shortlist and Direct-4-Shortlist 

Table 21: Stage-2 settings for knee-aware downstream selection. The key point is that these settings are fixed globally and used to compare SAKE against the direct-search baselines under matched downstream budgets. 17 Method Initial candidate construction Uses system anchors? Downstream budget / final rule System-core clean-system estimate only yes none / direct return of Lcore                 

> Direct-3-Shortlist uniformly spaced 3-point shortlist no initial shortlist {Lmin ,round(0 .5( Lmin +Lmax )) , L max }on the active discrete grid Direct-4-Shortlist uniformly spaced 4-point shortlist no initial shortlist formed from the two internal equally spaced grid quantiles on the active discrete grid SAKE S0={1, L core , L plateau }yes same pilot family with knee-aware final rule

Table 22: Selector-side comparison setup. The direct baselines share the same downstream pilot family and local decision rule, while SAKE differs by replacing the generic shortlist with a system-anchored one. 

Condition Anchor-source definition 

Clean full-state reference anchor input Gaussian noise σ = 0 .01 same trajectories with additive mild observation noise Gaussian noise σ = 0 .05 same trajectories with moderate observation noise Gaussian noise σ = 0 .10 same trajectories with heavy observation noise Downsample ×2 anchor extraction from half-resolution trajectories Downsample ×4 anchor extraction from quarter-resolution trajectories Random mask 10% anchor extraction from partially observed trajectories with light masking Random mask 25% anchor extraction from partially observed trajectories with heavier masking Same-data full-state anchors estimated from the training split rather than a separate clean-system pool Same-data noisy anchors estimated from the noisy training split without separate clean-system access 

Table 23: Anchor-source conditions used to test robustness of the clean-system stage. The downstream selector is unchanged across rows. 

Anchor condition Mean |∆Lcore | Mean |∆Lplateau | Knee-in-band Knee in S0 Knee in S1 Mean active-set size 

Clean full-state 0.00 0.00 50.0% 25.0% 95.8% 4.0 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .01 0.04 0.13 50.0% 25.0% 95.8% 4.1 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .05 0.08 0.50 45.8% 25.0% 91.7% 4.3 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .10 0.46 1.58 37.5% 20.8% 79.2% 4.7 Downsample ×2 0.13 0.38 47.9% 25.0% 95.8% 4.1 Downsample ×4 0.38 1.50 41.7% 20.8% 83.3% 4.6 Random mask 10% 0.08 0.54 45.8% 25.0% 91.7% 4.3 Random mask 25% 0.04 1.50 37.5% 20.8% 79.2% 4.8 Same-data full-state 0.00 0.13 50.0% 25.0% 95.8% 4.0 Same-data noisy 0.08 0.75 41.7% 20.8% 83.3% 4.5 

Table 24: Aggregate anchor diagnostics relative to the clean full-state reference. These results show how quickly anchor quality degrades and whether the downstream refinement still recovers a useful candidate band. 

Anchor condition Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Cost ratio 

Clean full-state System-core 0.0% 37.5% 1.88 49.7% 0.000 Clean full-state SAKE 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 0.043 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .01 System-core 0.0% 29.2% 1.96 53.8% 0.000 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .01 SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.29 7.5% 0.043 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .05 System-core 0.0% 25.0% 2.04 58.6% 0.000 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .05 SAKE 66.7% 95.8% 0.38 8.9% 0.044 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .10 System-core 0.0% 16.7% 2.33 69.4% 0.000 Gaussian noise σ = 0 .10 SAKE 54.2% 83.3% 0.63 13.8% 0.046 Downsample ×2 System-core 0.0% 33.3% 1.92 52.2% 0.000 Downsample ×2 SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.9% 0.043 Downsample ×4 System-core 0.0% 20.8% 2.21 65.7% 0.000 Downsample ×4 SAKE 58.3% 87.5% 0.54 12.1% 0.045 Random mask 10% System-core 0.0% 29.2% 2.00 56.0% 0.000 Random mask 10% SAKE 66.7% 91.7% 0.42 9.6% 0.044 Random mask 25% System-core 0.0% 16.7% 2.29 67.8% 0.000 Random mask 25% SAKE 54.2% 83.3% 0.67 14.7% 0.046 Same-data full-state System-core 0.0% 37.5% 1.88 50.8% 0.000 Same-data full-state SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.29 7.1% 0.043 Same-data noisy System-core 0.0% 20.8% 2.17 63.1% 0.000 Same-data noisy SAKE 62.5% 87.5% 0.50 11.9% 0.045 

Table 25: Aggregate downstream-selection quality under noisy, partial, and same-data anchor estima-tion. 18 Dataset Backbone Clean Noise 0.05 Downsample x4 Mask 25% Same-data noisy 

Lcore Lplateau Lcore Lplateau Lcore Lplateau Lcore Lplateau Lcore Lplateau 

DiffReact ConvLSTM 3 6 3 6 3 7 3 7 3 7DiffReact FNO 3 6 3 6 3 7 3 7 3 6DiffReact Transformer 3 6 3 6 3 7 3 7 3 7DiffReact U-Net 3 6 3 7 4 8 3 8 3 7RDB ConvLSTM 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 8 2 7RDB FNO 2 6 2 7 3 8 2 8 2 7RDB Transformer 2 6 2 7 3 8 2 8 2 7RDB U-Net 2 6 2 6 2 7 2 7 2 6

Table 26: Case-level anchor pairs under representative robustness conditions. Each entry reports the modal anchor pair across the three training seeds for that dataset–backbone–condition tuple. 

Dataset Backbone Clean Noise 0.05 Downsample x4 Mask 25% Same-data noisy 

DiffReact ConvLSTM 2 2 3 3 2DiffReact FNO 2 2 3 2 2DiffReact Transformer 1 1 2 2 1DiffReact U-Net 4 4 5 5 5RDB ConvLSTM 4 4 5 5 4RDB FNO 4 4 5 5 4RDB Transformer 5 5 6 6 5RDB U-Net 1 1 2 2 1

Table 27: Case-level SAKE selections under representative robustness conditions. Each entry reports the modal selected window across the three training seeds for that dataset–backbone–condition tuple.              

> Component Setting used in this appendix
> Anchor-source conditions same-data full-state, same-data noisy, spatial downsampled observations, sparse probe observations, masked observations, and learned-latent summaries Representation families randomized PCA, randomized SVD, random Gaussian projection, and convolutional autoencoder latent summaries Primary selector comparison System-core and SAKE under the same matched downstream budgets as the main paper Reference direct baselines Direct-4-Shortlist and ASHA, reported once as clean-independent search references Reported anchor metrics mean |∆Lcore |, mean |∆Lplateau |, knee-in-band coverage, knee-in-shortlist coverage, and final active-set coverage Reported selection metrics Exact, Within-1, mean |∆L|,Regret knee , mean unique Levaluations, and cost ratio

Table 28: Protocol for the proxy-anchor appendix. The goal is to quantify how stage one behaves when clean-system trajectories or a single preferred state summary are unavailable. 

Anchor source Mean |∆Lcore | Mean |∆Lplateau | Knee-in-band coverage Knee-in-shortlist coverage Final active-set coverage 

Same-data full-state 0.00 0.13 50.0% 25.0% 95.8% Same-data noisy 0.08 0.75 41.7% 20.8% 83.3% Downsample ×2 0.13 0.38 47.9% 25.0% 95.8% Sparse probes ( 16 × 16 ) 0.42 1.04 41.7% 20.8% 87.5% Random mask 25% 0.04 1.50 37.5% 20.8% 79.2% Learned latent summary 0.17 0.54 45.8% 25.0% 91.7% 

Table 29: Aggregate anchor-quality diagnostics when stage one is instantiated without a separate clean-system pool. 

Anchor source Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean unique L eval. Cost ratio 

Same-data full-state System-core 0.0% 37.5% 1.88 50.8% 0.0 0.000 Same-data full-state SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.29 7.1% 4.0 0.043 Same-data noisy System-core 0.0% 20.8% 2.17 63.1% 0.0 0.000 Same-data noisy SAKE 62.5% 87.5% 0.50 11.9% 4.5 0.045 Downsample ×2 System-core 0.0% 33.3% 1.92 52.2% 0.0 0.000 Downsample ×2 SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.9% 4.1 0.043 Sparse probes ( 16 × 16 ) System-core 0.0% 25.0% 2.08 58.9% 0.0 0.000 Sparse probes ( 16 × 16 ) SAKE 58.3% 87.5% 0.54 11.6% 4.4 0.045 Random mask 25% System-core 0.0% 16.7% 2.29 67.8% 0.0 0.000 Random mask 25% SAKE 54.2% 83.3% 0.67 14.7% 4.8 0.046 Learned latent summary System-core 0.0% 29.2% 2.00 55.4% 0.0 0.000 Learned latent summary SAKE 66.7% 91.7% 0.42 9.4% 4.3 0.044 

Table 30: Aggregate selector quality under proxy-anchor extraction. Direct-4-Shortlist and ASHA are unchanged by these anchor-source choices and are therefore used only as fixed clean-independent references rather than repeated in every row. 19 Representation Mean |∆Lcore | Mean |∆Lplateau | Exact Within-1 Mean Regret knee Cost ratio 

Randomized PCA 0.00 0.13 70.8% 95.8% 7.1% 0.043 Randomized SVD 0.04 0.17 70.8% 95.8% 7.3% 0.043 Random projection 0.33 0.83 54.2% 83.3% 13.9% 0.045 Autoencoder latent 0.13 0.29 66.7% 91.7% 8.0% 0.044 

Table 31: Representation sensitivity under full-state proxy extraction. 

Representation Mean |∆Lcore | Mean |∆Lplateau | Exact Within-1 Mean Regret knee Cost ratio 

Randomized PCA 0.08 0.75 62.5% 87.5% 11.9% 0.045 Randomized SVD 0.13 0.79 62.5% 87.5% 12.1% 0.045 Random projection 0.46 1.25 45.8% 75.0% 17.2% 0.046 Autoencoder latent 0.17 0.67 58.3% 87.5% 12.0% 0.045 

Table 32: Representation sensitivity under the same-data noisy proxy condition. 

Dataset Backbone Same-data full-state Same-data noisy Sparse probes Learned latent Oracle knee 

DiffReact ConvLSTM 2 2 3 2 2DiffReact FNO 2 2 2 2 2DiffReact Transformer 1 1 2 1 1DiffReact U-Net 4 5 5 4 5RDB ConvLSTM 4 4 5 4 5RDB FNO 4 4 5 4 4RDB Transformer 5 5 6 5 5RDB U-Net 1 1 2 1 1

Table 33: Case-level SAKE selections under representative proxy-anchor conditions. 

Quantity Symbol Values Interpretation 

Tail tolerance fraction ρ {0.02, 0.05, 0.10} controls how early the long-history tail is treated as effectively closed Plateau threshold τpl {0.02, 0.05, 0.10} controls how early diminishing returns are declared One-standard-error multiplier κ {1.0, 1.5, 2.0} controls the smallest-reliable-window rule in stage two Bootstrap resamples B {100, 300, 500} controls the stability of the UCB estimates used by stage one Knee tolerance ϵ {2%, 5%, 10%, 15%} changes the oracle target itself rather than only the selector rule 

Table 34: Parameter sweeps used for the sensitivity analysis.                                                                                                                                         

> Quantity Value Mean Lcore Mean Lplateau Knee-in-band Mean unique Leval. Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L|Mean Regret knee Cost ratio
> ρ0.02 2.8 6.1 58.3% 4.8 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.5% 0.046
> ρ0.05 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 0.043
> ρ0.10 2.1 5.8 41.7% 4.0 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.4% 0.039
> τpl 0.02 2.5 6.4 54.2% 4.9 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.4% 0.047
> τpl 0.05 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 0.043
> τpl 0.10 2.5 5.4 41.7% 4.0 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.6% 0.039
> κ1.0 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 66.7% 100.0% 0.33 7.1% 0.043
> κ1.5 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 0.043
> κ2.0 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 70.8% 100.0% 0.29 6.9% 0.043
> B100 2.6 6.0 47.9% 4.6 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.5% 0.044
> B300 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 0.043
> B500 2.5 6.0 50.0% 4.4 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.6% 0.043

Table 35: Aggregate sensitivity of SAKE to the fixed selector constants. 20 Dataset Backbone ϵ = 2% ϵ = 5% ϵ = 10% ϵ = 15% 

DiffReact ConvLSTM 2 2 2 2DiffReact FNO 2 2 1 1DiffReact Transformer 1 1 1 1DiffReact U-Net 6 5 4 3RDB ConvLSTM 6 5 4 4RDB FNO 4 4 3 3RDB Transformer 5 5 5 4RDB U-Net 1 1 1 1

Table 36: Case-level oracle-knee locations under alternative near-optimality tolerances. 

ϵ Method Exact Within-1 Mean |∆L| Mean Regret knee Mean Regret best Cost ratio 

2% System-core 0.0% 29.2% 2.04 58.2% 58.6% 0.000 2% Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 79.2% 0.71 13.4% 13.9% 0.058 2% SAKE 62.5% 91.7% 0.42 8.6% 9.1% 0.043 5% System-core 0.0% 37.5% 1.88 49.7% 49.9% 0.000 5% Direct-4-Shortlist 62.5% 87.5% 0.50 10.5% 10.8% 0.058 5% SAKE 75.0% 100.0% 0.25 6.7% 7.0% 0.043 10% System-core 0.0% 25.0% 2.08 56.8% 57.2% 0.000 10% Direct-4-Shortlist 50.0% 79.2% 0.79 14.2% 14.7% 0.058 10% SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.38 7.5% 8.0% 0.043 15% System-core 0.0% 20.8% 2.21 61.9% 62.3% 0.000 15% Direct-4-Shortlist 45.8% 75.0% 0.92 17.0% 17.5% 0.058 15% SAKE 70.8% 95.8% 0.33 7.2% 7.7% 0.043 

Table 37: Selector performance under alternative oracle-knee tolerances. 

Quantity Definition in this appendix 

Selector wall-clock End-to-end elapsed time for one selector run, including all pilot training and validation passes Selector GPU-hours Sum over all GPUs used by a selector run, measured over the same pilot and validation work Full-sweep wall-clock ratio Selector wall-clock divided by the elapsed time of the corresponding exhaustive sweep Queueing / scheduling Excluded; all measurements assume dedicated local execution on the shared A100 server 

Table 38: Timing definitions used in this appendix.                                           

> Method Mean selector wall-clock (h) Mean selector GPU-hours Full-sweep wall-clock ratio Mean unique Leval. Cost ratio
> Direct-3-Shortlist 1.04 4.16 0.069 5.8 0.057 Direct-4-Shortlist 1.08 4.31 0.071 5.9 0.058 ASHA 1.23 4.94 0.081 6.0 0.065 BO-MF 1.28 5.12 0.084 6.0 0.068 BOHB-style 1.25 5.00 0.082 6.0 0.067 SAKE 0.86 3.43 0.057 4.4 0.043 Full sweep 15.14 60.55 1.000 6.0 1.000

Table 39: Overall timing summary across the shared A100 environment. 21 Dataset Backbone Method Wall-clock (h) GPU-hours Cost ratio 

DiffReact ConvLSTM Direct-4-Shortlist 0.62 2.48 0.054 DiffReact ConvLSTM ASHA 0.70 2.78 0.061 DiffReact ConvLSTM BO-MF 0.72 2.90 0.064 DiffReact ConvLSTM BOHB-style 0.70 2.82 0.063 DiffReact ConvLSTM SAKE 0.52 2.07 0.041 DiffReact ConvLSTM Full sweep 9.40 37.60 1.000 DiffReact FNO Direct-4-Shortlist 1.29 5.16 0.057 DiffReact FNO ASHA 1.48 5.91 0.064 DiffReact FNO BO-MF 1.53 6.13 0.067 DiffReact FNO BOHB-style 1.50 5.98 0.066 DiffReact FNO SAKE 1.05 4.19 0.043 DiffReact FNO Full sweep 18.70 74.80 1.000 DiffReact Transformer Direct-4-Shortlist 0.97 3.89 0.056 DiffReact Transformer ASHA 1.12 4.46 0.063 DiffReact Transformer BO-MF 1.16 4.63 0.066 DiffReact Transformer BOHB-style 1.13 4.52 0.065 DiffReact Transformer SAKE 0.79 3.15 0.042 DiffReact Transformer Full sweep 14.30 57.20 1.000 DiffReact U-Net Direct-4-Shortlist 1.12 4.49 0.058 DiffReact U-Net ASHA 1.26 5.06 0.066 DiffReact U-Net BO-MF 1.31 5.25 0.068 DiffReact U-Net BOHB-style 1.28 5.12 0.067 DiffReact U-Net SAKE 0.87 3.48 0.042 DiffReact U-Net Full sweep 15.80 63.20 1.000 RDB ConvLSTM Direct-4-Shortlist 0.72 2.87 0.059 RDB ConvLSTM ASHA 0.84 3.35 0.066 RDB ConvLSTM BO-MF 0.86 3.43 0.069 RDB ConvLSTM BOHB-style 0.85 3.39 0.068 RDB ConvLSTM SAKE 0.62 2.46 0.045 RDB ConvLSTM Full sweep 10.10 40.40 1.000 RDB FNO Direct-4-Shortlist 1.41 5.64 0.058 RDB FNO ASHA 1.63 6.51 0.065 RDB FNO BO-MF 1.69 6.74 0.068 RDB FNO BOHB-style 1.65 6.59 0.067 RDB FNO SAKE 1.14 4.55 0.043 RDB FNO Full sweep 19.60 78.40 1.000 RDB Transformer Direct-4-Shortlist 1.05 4.20 0.057 RDB Transformer ASHA 1.22 4.86 0.064 RDB Transformer BO-MF 1.26 5.04 0.067 RDB Transformer BOHB-style 1.23 4.92 0.066 RDB Transformer SAKE 0.85 3.42 0.043 RDB Transformer Full sweep 15.00 60.00 1.000 RDB U-Net Direct-4-Shortlist 1.44 5.75 0.064 RDB U-Net ASHA 1.64 6.55 0.072 RDB U-Net BO-MF 1.71 6.84 0.074 RDB U-Net BOHB-style 1.66 6.62 0.073 RDB U-Net SAKE 1.04 4.15 0.046 RDB U-Net Full sweep 18.20 72.80 1.000 

> Table 40: Case-level realized timing for the principal search baselines and the exhaustive reference. 22

Method Stage-1 wall-clock Stage-2 wall-clock Validation overhead Total wall-clock Total GPU-hours 

Direct-3-Shortlist 0.10 0.79 0.15 1.04 4.16 Direct-4-Shortlist 0.12 0.80 0.16 1.08 4.31 ASHA 0.18 0.89 0.16 1.23 4.94 BO-MF 0.21 0.91 0.16 1.28 5.12 BOHB-style 0.20 0.88 0.17 1.25 5.00 SAKE 0.16 0.54 0.16 0.86 3.43 

Table 41: Stage-wise timing breakdown for the low-cost selectors. 23 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract and introduction make scoped empirical claims about SAKE in the fixed-window autoregressive setting, and these are supported by Sections 3.2, 4.1–4.1.3, the main empirical results, Appendix A, and the Discussion. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or [N/A] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The Discussion explicitly states the main limitations, including the focus on fixed-window one-step autoregressive simulators, dependence on usable full-state or proxy summaries, and remaining hard cases; Appendix D, Appendix E, Appendix F, and Appendix G further probe robustness, scope, and cost. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper is primarily methodological and empirical: it formalizes the problem and specifies SAKE in Section 3, but it does not present theorem-level theoretical results that require formal proofs. 

24 Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The paper specifies the candidate grid, datasets, splits, backbones, pilot/full-training protocol, metrics, selector hyperparameters, and compute/timing protocol in Sections 4.1–4.1.3, Appendix B, Appendix C, and Appendix G, which together disclose the information needed to reproduce the main empirical claims. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [No] Justification: The paper uses public PDEBench data, but the manuscript and provided supplemental material do not themselves include an anonymized code release and reproduction package with explicit run instructions for the full experimental suite. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. 

25 • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://neurips.cc/public/ guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://neurips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 4.1 specifies the datasets, baselines, hardware/software stack, optimizer, batch size, rollout horizons, train/validation/test split, and seed protocol, while Appendix B and Appendix C provide the architecture fields and selector hyperparameters. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate informa-tion about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [No] Justification: The paper averages over three training seeds and reports detailed case-wise and aggregate tables, but it does not provide explicit error bars, confidence intervals, or formal hypothesis tests for the main experimental comparisons. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

26 Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Section 4.1.2 reports the compute environment (4 NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs, PyTorch 2.1, CUDA 12.0), and Appendix G gives overall and case-level wall-clock time and GPU-hour measurements for the reported experiments. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: The work studies numerical PDE forecasting on public benchmark scientific data and standard model families, and it does not involve human subjects, personally identifiable information, or deceptive deployment; we are not aware of any aspect that departs from the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [No] Justification: The paper is a foundational methodological study for scientific machine learning, and while likely impacts include more efficient simulator selection workflows, the manuscript does not include an explicit discussion of both positive and negative societal impacts. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deploy-ment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitor-ing misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 

27 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper does not release high-risk generative models, scraped web data, or other assets with an obvious misuse profile; it studies PDE forecasting on public scientific benchmark data. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [No] Justification: The paper credits existing assets such as PDEBench and prior methods via citations, but it does not explicitly state the licenses and terms of use for the dataset and software dependencies in the manuscript. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper introduces a method and empirical evaluation, but it does not claim the release of a new dataset, model checkpoint, or documented software package in the submission materials. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their sub-missions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? 

28 Answer: [N/A] Justification: The work does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The work does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects, so IRB approval is not applicable. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applica-ble), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [N/A] Justification: Appendix H states that LLMs were used only for writing and presentation assistance and not as part of the core methodology, so this question is not applicable to the scientific content of the paper. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not be described. 

29