Title: WaterAdmin: Orchestrating Community Water Distribution Optimization via AI Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10343v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 00:53:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# WaterAdmin: Orchestrating Community Water Distribution Optimization via AI Agents 

Jiaqi Wen 

University of Houston 

Pingbo Tang 

Carnegie Mellon University 

Shaolei Ren 

University of California, Riverside 

Jianyi Yang 

University of Houston 

Abstract —We study the operation of community water systems, where pumps and valves must be scheduled to reliably meet water demands while minimizing energy consumption. While existing optimization-based methods are effective under well-modeled environments, real-world community scenarios exhibit highly dynamic contexts—such as human activities, weather variations, etc—that significantly affect water demand patterns and operational targets across different zones. Traditional op-timization approaches struggle to aggregate and adapt to such heterogeneous and rapidly evolving contextual information in real time. While Large Language Model (LLM) agents offer strong capabilities for understanding heterogeneous community context, they are not suitable for directly producing reliable real-time control actions. To address these challenges, we pro-pose a bi-level AI-agent-based framework, WaterAdmin , which integrates LLM-based community context abstraction at the upper level with optimization-based operational control at the lower level. This design leverages the complementary strengths of both paradigms to enable adaptive and reliable operation. We implement WaterAdmin on the hydraulic simulation platform EPANET and demonstrate superior performance in maintaining pressure reliability and reducing energy consumption under highly dynamic community contexts. 

Index Terms —Water Distribution Optimization, AI Agents 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Community water systems are critical infrastructure for de-livering fresh water to meet demand of community consumers [3], [11], [17]. However, water operations are highly energy in-tensive, requiring substantial electricity for distribution across large-scale hydraulic networks. According to the report of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) [4], municipal water systems typically account for approximately 30% to 40% of total municipal electricity consumption, and the associated energy costs in the United States amount to billions of dollars annually. As urban infrastructure continues to expand, the demand for electricity and water is steadily increasing. Consequently, achieving reliable and energy-efficient water infrastructure operations has become a critical challenge for the development of sustainable and smart communities. We consider the community water distribution operations whose objectives include satisfying water demand, maintaining required pressure levels, and minimizing energy costs through the regulation of pumps and valves in the Water Distribution Network (WDN). Existing studies have developed a wide range of optimization-based control approaches [6], [8], [9], [12], [23], [25]. However, achieving reliable and efficient water 

> * Correspondence to: Jianyi Yang (jyang66@uh.edu).

operations increasingly requires incorporating diverse and dy-namic community context, such as human activities, weather conditions, and electricity grid signals, because these factors strongly influence water demand patterns, operational require-ments, and electricity costs. Existing optimization methods typically cannot fully exploit this real-time community infor-mation, as it is often unstructured and obtained from various online sources. Large Language Model (LLM) agents have been utilized to enhance water system operations due to their powerful capabilities in information retrieval, multi-modal information processing, and reasoning [13], [15], [16], [34]. Among them, [13], [15] utilize LLMs to generate rule-based codes to control WDN components. [16], [34] explore the application of LLM agents to generate system models and to provide scheduling suggestions to human operators. Despite these achievements, there still lacks an AI Agent-based optimizer that can give real-time control actions for WDN components, such as pump speed and valve positions. One may consider using LLM agents to directly generate control actions, but this introduces several limitations [19], [21]. First, LLM agents may generate physically infeasible actions or actions that violate operational constraints, causing higher safety risks. Moreover, LLM agents often become trapped in local optima when solving optimiza-tion problems, potentially resulting in poor performance. Last but not least, the information retrieval and reasoning processes of LLM agents can incur large latency, making it infeasible for real-time water operations that require timely responses. Therefore, we argue that LLM agents are better suited for high-level planning and strategic guidance, while direct actions for pump or valve control should be output by specialized optimization-based models. These insights bring the opportunities to combine the complementary strengths of LLM agents and optimization-based approaches, enabling effective integration of commu-nity contextual information for reliable and energy-efficient water system operations. To this end, we propose a bi-level operational framework WaterAdmin that leverages the rea-soning and information integration capabilities of LLM agents together with the resilience of optimization-based methods. Specifically, we make the following contributions. • We propose a bi-level framework for water operations. At the higher level, LLM agents abstract real-time commu-nity context and human instructions to generate structured operational targets, such as water demand forecasts, location-

> arXiv:2604.10343v1 [cs.LG] 11 Apr 2026

specific pressure ranges, or nominal water tank levels. To facil-itate the LLM reasoning to generate informative operational targets, we perform in-context prompting which incorporate historical instances as in-context prompting and guide the LLM agent to generate target levels based on the in-context information. • At the lower level, we develop an ML-based optimizer that exploits the agent-informed structured operational targets to control pumps and valves in real time. The model is trained to explicitly utilize these agent-informed signals by simulating operational episodes in EPANET [1] with true sequences of water usage and operational targets. To address the challenges posed by non-differentiable simulators such as EPANET, we adopt a training procedure based on zeroth-order optimization to estimate gradient information. This approach enables the ML-based optimizer to capture WDN dynamics while optimizing operational objectives. • We conduct numerical evaluations on the EPANET NET3 benchmark [1] under different component configu-rations. The proposed WaterAdmin is compared against the rule-based control integrated in EPANET and an ML-based optimizer without exploiting LLM agent-based context abstraction. We further perform ablation studies with different LLM agents and varying windows of LLM-informed targets to assess their impact on performance. The experimental re-sults demonstrate that integrating LLM agents with ML-based optimizers yields superior performance in both operational reliability and energy efficiency. II. W ATER DISTRIBUTION OPTIMIZATION 

We consider the community water distribution optimization problem whose objective is to satisfy water demands and maintain water pressures with minimized energy costs by regulating the WDN components in real time. 

Operational states . A WDN [2], [36] can be modeled as directed graph model G = {V , E} [7], [38]. The set of network nodes V includes demand nodes, water storage nodes and pump stations. For each node v ∈ V at time step t, the water pressure is denoted as hv,t (psi). For water storage nodes, the pressure is in proportional to its water level. The water usage at a demand node v at time step t is dv,t (m3/s ). The network nodes are interconnected by pipelines represented by the directed edges (u, v ) ∈ E . The flow rate from node u

to node v at time step t is denoted as q(u,v ),t (m3/s) which is a function of the pressure drop from node u to node v.Meters and sensors integrated into water systems enable the real-time measurement of pressure, flow rate, water level, and other essential metrics [22], [26], [27]. We summarize these state variables using a state vector st.

Control components . Pumps and valves are the primary components regulating operational states in water networks [12], [23], [29]. Pumps are deployed at pump stations and of different types including constant-speed and variational-speed pumps. We consider variational speed pumps whose speed can be adjusted to provide varying head for overcoming friction and elevation head loss [32]. Valves can be adjusted Generate the water demand    

> for the next hour given the
> event: “There will be a
> football game at…”
> Generate the targeted
> pressure range given the
> instruction: “maintain
> the pressure for …”
> Higher level: Community context abstraction
> Lower level: WDN operational
> optimization
> Physical WDN
> Operation targets: demands in
> next hours; pressure limits; …
> WDN states :
> pressure, water
> tank level,…
> Control actions :
> pump speed, valve
> position,…

Fig. 1: Illustration of WaterAdmin Architecture. by actuators to regulate water pressure and flow. The action vector xt at time step t includes pump activation time (s), pump speed (r/min), and valve positions. Scheduling these components directly impacts energy consumption. 

Optimization objective . The objective of WDN optimiza-tion includes the demand satisfaction related loss, energy cost, and operational constraints [8], [29], [36]. A demand node or a water tank has a nominal head h∗ 

> v

which are expected to be kept during water operation to satisfy the fluctuating demands. The deviation from the the nominal pressure will incur a loss lh(xt) = 1

> |V|

P 

> v∈V

∥hv,t − h∗ 

> v

∥. Additionally, the energy cost is expressed as le(xt) = et · E(xt), where 

E(xt) denotes the energy consumption induced by action xt

at time step t, and et represents the energy price, which may be fixed or time-varying over an episode depending on the energy pricing agreement. Converting these metrics into the same measure, the multi-objective optimization objective is expressed as l(x1, · · · , x T ) = γ1lh(xt) + γ2le(xt).The operational constraints of WDNs are described below. First, we require the pressure at each concerned demand node and storage tank v ∈ V D satisfies hmin ,v ≤ hv,t ≤ hmax ,v 

given hmin ,v and hmax ,v the minimum and maximum pres-sure limits. The minimum pressure limit hmin ,v ensures the satisfaction of water demands while the maximum pressure limit guarantees a safe water pressure. The flow rate of each pipeline should satisfy the physical constraints. For a pipeline 

(u, v ) ∈ E , it satisfies that qmin ,(u,v ) ≤ q(u,v ),t ≤ qmax ,(u,v )

where qmin ,(u,v ) and qmax ,(u,v ) are the minimum and maxi-mum flow limits. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

In this section, we introduce the design of WaterAdmin 

for WDN operations. 

A. WaterAdmin : Framework Overview 

WaterAdmin is a bi-level framework illustrated in Fig-ure 1. At the higher level, LLM agents are used to summarize community context descriptions and generate high-level oper-ational targets. These context descriptions may include event schedules for major buildings, weather conditions, and other factors that influence water demand patterns across zones. Also, they can include human instructions such as required pressure ranges or flow rates in specific areas to support activities like fire protection [5]. Based on this information, the LLM agents produce operational targets, including forecasted water demands over the next several time steps, target pressure ranges for critical zones, and desired water tank levels. These targets are abstracted into a structured format by the LLMs and subsequently processed by the lower-level ML-based optimizer. At the lower level, an ML model takes as input both the structured operational targets abstracted by the LLMs and the current WDN states. The WDN states include nodal water pressures, pipeline flow rates, and water tank levels. Based on this information, the ML model directly outputs control actions for WDN components, including pump speeds and valve positions. Next, we present the design details for both levels of WaterAdmin .

B. Context Abstraction via LLM Agents 

LLM agents [14], [24], [35] have recently emerged as pow-erful foundation models capable of performing a wide range of tasks, including natural language understanding, information summarization, and decision support across diverse domains. Leveraging these capabilities, we can directly utilize com-mercial LLM agent APIs for community context abstraction in the operation of Water Distribution Networks (WDNs), enabling the transformation of heterogeneous and unstructured contextual information into structured operational targets. Nevertheless, guiding LLMs to generate informative oper-ational targets through prompting remains challenging. First, LLMs are not well suited for accurately generating numer-ical quantities, such as continuous water demand values or pressure. Moreover, it is difficult for LLMs to fully capture complex community scenarios when constrained by prompts of limited length. We solve these challenges by the following methods. First, to facilitate LLM understanding of numerical quan-tities in water operations, we discretize them into high-level concepts. Taking water demand as an example, we partition the continuous demand range into several regions and assign a qualitative level to each region, where Level 1 corresponds to the lowest water usage and higher levels indicate increasing demand. The partition is not necessarily uniform; in our imple-mentation, we adopt a logarithmic scale to define the regions. This approach removes the need for LLMs to reason about precise numerical values that may vary across communities, allowing them instead to more effectively capture relative information about water usage levels. In addition, to enable effective in-context inference and target generation, we design a set of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompts as inputs to the LLM [37]. These prompts incorporate historical context descriptions together with their correspond-ing operational targets as in-context examples. For example, in the task of water demand generation, the prompt includes diverse historical instances consisting of event descriptions and their associated water usage levels. We then append an inference CoT query, such as: “Given the event description . . . , generate the water demand level for the next hour at this zone in the format [. . . ], and briefly justify the demand by comparing it with historical examples.” This prompting strat-egy guides the LLM to reason over historical cases and more effectively abstract operational targets. Concrete examples of the proposed prompts are provided in the appendix. 

C. ML-based Operational Optimization 

The lower-level optimizer provides direct control actions for WDN components including pumps and valves. The lower-level optimizer must be able to exploit the context abstraction by LLM agents to optimize the operational objectives, achiev-ing reliable and energy efficient water distribution. Traditional methods for pump and valve control typically solve large-scale optimization problems based on water distri-bution formulations [8], [9], [12], [23], [30]. However, these optimization-based approaches are largely built upon fixed hydraulic formulations and therefore have limited ability to ex-ploit structured context abstraction for real-time adaptation to dynamic community scenarios. Moreover, simplified hydraulic dynamic models often deviate significantly from the behavior of real-world water systems. As water system simulators con-tinue to improve in fidelity [1], [18], it becomes increasingly important to incorporate simulation-based knowledge into the optimization process. To address these challenges, we develop an ML-based optimizer that can leverage structured context abstraction and incorporate simulator knowledge during training. Specif-ically, we train an ML-based optimizer fθ , parameterized by θ, by simulating operational episodes—each consisting of T rounds—using EPANET [1] with the true sequences of water demand and operational target signals, denoted by 

y = {y1, . . . , y T }. At each round t, the structured operational targets generated by the LLMs are converted into numerical representations zt that can be processed by the ML model. Given the WDN state st and the target signals zt, the ML model outputs control actions x = {x1, . . . , x T }, where 

xt = fθ (zt, s t).The ML model is trained by minimizing the operational loss 

min  

> θ

L(θ) := l(x, y) + λ⊤p(x, y), (1) where l(·) denotes the optimization objective introduced in Section II, p(·) is a barrier function that penalizes constraint violations related to pressures or flow rates in Section II, and λ

is the associated Lagrangian weight. To address the challenges posed by the non-differentiable simulator like EPANET, we train the ML model using zeroth-order optimization. At each training step, the parameter vector θ is updated via gradient descent, where the gradient is estimated using a zeroth-order estimator: 

ˆg = E

 L(θ + δu) − L(θ − δu)2δ u



,

with u ∼ N (0 , I), and the expectation taken over the randomness of the direction vector u.IV. E XPERIMENT 

In this section, we present the main evaluation results of WaterAdmin where LLMs are used to predict demand satisfaction targets based on community context. 

A. Setups 1) EPANET Setups: : In the experiments, we adopt the EPANET benchmark network NET3 [28] which consists of 97 nodes, including 2 water sources, 3 water tanks, and 92 de-mand nodes. We select 13 representation nodes which locates at different areas to evaluate the performance. The other details about the EPANET setups are provided in Appendix VI-A. 

2) Objective settings: Following the recommendations in the EPA Service Water Pressure Technical Sheet [33], we set the nominal nodal pressure target to 60 psi. A quadratic penalty is applied to quantify deviations of nodal pressure from this nominal value. We further enforce a maximum pressure limit of 100 psi and a minimum pressure limit of 20 psi; pressures exceeding these bounds are treated as violations. The energy consumption at each node and each hour is computed by the EPANET simulator. We evaluate the total energy consumption per hour across the entire community, without considering time-varying energy prices. 

3) Demand Datasets: We adopt the water consumption data from [10] to simulate the demand. Details about data pre-processing are provided in Appendix VI-B. 

4) Agent Setups: We provide the setups for LLM agents used for in-context prompting and water demand forecasting. 

In-context Prompting . We employ an LLM agent to con-struct in-context prompting examples that encode community context and corresponding consumer demand levels. The orig-inal demand samples are discretized into five usage levels (0–4), representing increasing water consumption intensities. ChatGPT-4o is used to generate representative pairs, where each example consists of a concise event description and its associated demand level. To this end, the LLM is assigned the role of a domain expert and provided with semantic definitions of the demand levels. It is instructed to generate realistic event narratives by jointly considering usage levels, temporal information, and building types, while capturing characteristic water usage variations. To enhance the diversity of in-context examples, the LLM is allowed to introduce plausible commu-nity activities, such as special events, social gatherings, dining promotions, sports events, and seasonal factors. 

LLM Agents . We employ an LLM agent (ChatGPT-4o by default) to perform water demand forecasting which serves as the demand satisfaction target for lower-level optimization. The LLM is prompted with event-level semantic descriptions TABLE I: Performance comparison of different controllers.                       

> Controller P-MSE Max Viol. (%) Min Viol. (%) Energy (MWh/hour)
> WaterAdmin 60.24 7.57 14.95 0.85
> WaterAdmin 40.33 10.64 19.13 1.31
> WaterAdmin 20.33 12.99 20.46 2.03
> ML 0.38 19.56 17.73 2.96
> Rule 5.55 93.49 3.09 30.01

and assigned an expert role to infer demand levels over forecasting horizons of 2, 4, or 6 hours based on the provided event descriptions. The interaction pipeline is implemented using LangChain [31]. During the forecasting process, prompt memory is managed via an InMemorySaver checkpointer, which preserves historical dialogue prompts and enables the LLM to maintain contextual continuity across inference steps, even when certain semantic details are not explicitly included in the exemplary prompts. We evaluate multiple LLM agents, including ChatGPT-4o, DeepSeek-V3, and Gemini-3-flash-preview, and compare their performance in Appendix VII. 

5) Baselines: Our baseline methods include a rule-based optimizer ( Rule ), a pure ML-based optimizer ( ML ), and the proposed method ( WaterAdmin ). Details about the baselines are provided in Appendix VI-C. 

B. Results 

Table I reports the performance of different approaches on the test demand dataset. Here, P-MSE denotes the mean squared error of pressure deviation from the nominal pressure target and is normalized by the nominal pressure. Max Viol. and Min Viol. represent the violation rates of the upper and lower pressure limits, respectively. The total energy consump-tion per hour for the entire community is also reported. The results show that training the ML model to explicitly optimize the operational objective enables the ML-based op-timizer to significantly outperform EPANET’s built-in rule-based control in terms of both pressure regulation and en-ergy efficiency. This demonstrates the effectiveness of zeroth-order–trained ML models in capturing the hydraulic dynamics of the simulator and optimizing water distribution objectives. Moreover, by incorporating LLM-informed targets, 

WaterAdmin consistently outperforms the ML baseline. In particular, compared to ML , WaterAdmin 6 with a 6-hour prediction window reduces the pressure MSE by 36.8% and the energy consumption by 71.2%, highlighting the substantial benefits of integrating LLM-based context abstraction. Finally, we evaluate WaterAdmin under different pre-diction windows to examine the impact of the amount of LLM-provided information. As the prediction window in-creases, WaterAdmin achieves improved pressure stabiliza-tion and lower energy consumption, indicating that richer LLM-informed context contributes to better water distribution performance. V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we study AI-agent–based methods for im-proving water distribution operations with the objective of satisfying water demands while minimizing energy consump-tion. We propose a bi-level framework in which the higher level performs LLM-based community context abstraction to generate structured operational targets, and the lower level employs an ML-based optimizer for precise control of WDN components. The proposed framework is evaluated in the EPANET simulation environment, demonstrating the effective-ness of AI agents in stabilizing water pressure and reducing overall energy consumption. REFERENCES [1] Epanet: Application for modeling drinking water distribution systems. https://www.epa.gov/water-research/epanet, 2024. [2] Information about public water systems. https://www.epa.gov/ dwreginfo/information-about-public-water-systems, 2024. [3] Drinking water distribution system tools and resources. https://www.epa. gov/dwreginfo/drinking-water-distribution-system-tools-and-resources, 2025. [4] Energy efficiency for water utilities. https://www.epa.gov/ sustainable-water-infrastructure/energy-efficiency-water-utilities, 2025. [5] How much water do fire hydrants provide for firefighting. https://www. nfpa.org/news-blogs-and-articles/blogs/2024/01/12/fire-hydrant-flow, 2025. [6] LS Araujo, H Ramos, and ST Coelho. Pressure control for leakage minimisation in water distribution systems management. Water resources management , 20:133–149, 2006. [7] Inaam Ashraf, Janine Strotherm, Luca Hermes, and Barbara Hammer. Physics-informed graph neural networks for water distribution systems. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 38, pages 21905–21913, 2024. [8] Bruno Brentan, Filipe Mota, Andrea Menapace, Ariele Zanfei, and Gustavo Meirelles. Optimizing pump operations in water distribution networks: Balancing energy efficiency, water quality and operational constraints. Journal of Water Process Engineering , 63:105374, 2024. [9] Carmen Cheh, Justin Albrethsen, Zhen Wei Ng, Binbin Chen, Xin Lou, Zaki Masood, and David KY Yau. Water pump operation optimization under dynamic market and consumer behaviour. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems , pages 335–346, 2024. [10] Carmen Cheh, Justin Albrethsen, Zhen Wei Ng, Binbin Chen, Xin Lou, Zaki Masood, and David KY Yau. Water pump operation optimization under dynamic market and consumer behaviour. In Proceedings of the 15th ACM International Conference on Future and Sustainable Energy Systems , pages 335–346, 2024. [11] National Research Council (US) Safe Drinking Water Committee. Drinking water and health: Volume 4. 1982. [12] Dariush Fooladivanda and Joshua A Taylor. Energy-optimal pump scheduling and water flow. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , 5(3):1016–1026, 2017. [13] Yinon Goldshtein, Gal Perelman, Assaf Schuster, and Avi Ostfeld. Large language models for water distribution systems modeling and decision-making. In World Environmental and Water Resources Congress 2025 ,pages 921–928, 2025. [14] Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xiangliang Zhang. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 , 2024. [15] Guo He, Jungang Luo, Feixiong Luo, Xue Yang, Xin Jing, and Huhu Cui. Iwms-llm: an intelligent water resources management system based on large language models. Journal of Hydroinformatics , 27(11):1685– 1702, 2025. [16] Niuosha Hedaiaty Marzouny and Rebecca Dziedzic. Ai-assisted pump operation for energy-efficient water distribution systems. Engineering Proceedings , 69(1):3, 2024. [17] Harry E Hickey. Water supply systems and evaluation methods: Volume i: Water supply system concepts. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Washington DC , 2008. [18] MohammadHossein Homaei, Agust´ ın Javier Di Bartolo, Mar ´Avila, Oscar Mogoll´ on-Guti´ errez, and Andr´ es Caro. Digital transformation in the water distribution system based on the digital twins concept. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.06694 , 2024. [19] Seyed Hossein Hosseini, Babak Zolghadr-Asli, Henrikki Tenkanen, Kaveh Madani, Mir A Matin, Ibrahim Demir, Avi Ostfeld, Vijay P Singh, and Dragan Savic. Making waves: A conceptual framework exploring how large language model-based multi-agent systems could reshape water engineering. Water Research , page 125157, 2025. [20] Marios S. Kyriakou, Marios Demetriades, Stelios G. Vrachimis, Demetrios G. Eliades, and Marios M. Polycarpou. EPyT: An EPANET-Python Toolkit for Smart Water Network Simulations. Journal of Open Source Software , 8(92):5947, December 2023. [21] Milad Latifi, Ramiz Beig Zali, and Dragan Savi´ c. Genai models for urban water systems: Opportunities, challenges, and future directions. 

Cambridge Prisms: Water , pages 1–20. [22] Konstantinos Loizou and Eftichios Koutroulis. Water level sensing: State of the art review and performance evaluation of a low-cost measurement system. Measurement , 89:204–214, 2016. [23] Tiago Luna, Jo˜ ao Ribau, David Figueiredo, and Rita Alves. Improv-ing energy efficiency in water supply systems with pump scheduling optimization. Journal of cleaner production , 213:342–356, 2019. [24] Junyu Luo, Weizhi Zhang, Ye Yuan, Yusheng Zhao, Junwei Yang, Yiyang Gu, Bohan Wu, Binqi Chen, Ziyue Qiao, Qingqing Long, et al. Large language model agent: A survey on methodology, applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 , 2025. [25] Konstantinos Oikonomou and Masood Parvania. Optimal coordination of water distribution energy flexibility with power systems operation. 

IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid , 10(1):1101–1110, 2018. [26] Segun O Olatinwo and Trudi-H Joubert. Energy efficient solutions in wireless sensor systems for water quality monitoring: A review. IEEE Sensors Journal , 19(5):1596–1625, 2018. [27] Jos´ e P´ erez-Padillo, Jorge Garc´ ıa Morillo, Jos´ e Ramirez-Faz, Manuel Torres Rold´ an, and Pilar Montesinos. Design and implementation of a pressure monitoring system based on iot for water supply networks. 

Sensors , 20(15):4247, 2020. [28] Lewis A Rossman et al. Epanet users manual. 1994. [29] Manish K Singh and Vassilis Kekatos. Optimal scheduling of water distribution systems. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems ,7(2):711–723, 2019. [30] Anna Stuhlmacher and Johanna L Mathieu. Water distribution networks as flexible loads: A chance-constrained programming approach. Electric Power Systems Research , 188:106570, 2020. [31] Oguzhan Topsakal and Tahir Cetin Akinci. Creating large language model applications utilizing langchain: A primer on developing llm apps fast. In International conference on applied engineering and natural sciences , volume 1, pages 1050–1056, 2023. [32] Vestal Tutterow and Aimee T McKane. Variable speed pumping: A guide to successful applications. 2004. [33] United States Environmental Protection Agency. Service Water Pressure Technical Sheet . EPA, 2023. [34] Jian Wang, Guangtao Fu, and Dragan Savic. Leveraging large language models for automating water distribution network optimization. Water Research , page 124536, 2025. [35] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. Asurvey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6):186345, 2024. [36] Ye Wang, Vicenc ¸ Puig, and Gabriela Cembrano. Non-linear economic model predictive control of water distribution networks. Journal of Process Control , 56:23–34, 2017. [37] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022. [38] Lu Xing and Lina Sela. Graph neural networks for state estimation in water distribution systems: Application of supervised and semisuper-vised learning. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management ,148(5):04022018, 2022. VI. APPENDIX I DETAILS OF EXPERIMENTAL SETUPS 

A. EPANET Setting 

As shown in Fig. 2, we use the built-in EPANET benchmark network NET3 [28] as the underlying water distribution system in our experiments, and employ Epyt [20] as an interface to connect EPANET with our experimental framework. 

1) Water net settings: All nodal and pipe parameters are kept identical to the original NET3 configuration, except for some pipes that are modified to pumps or valves to enable network control. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the NET3 network consists of 97 nodes, including 2 water sources, 3 water tanks, and 92 demand nodes. 

Nodes : We partition the NET3 network into 4 regions with approximately balanced numbers of nodes, where nodes within the same region have similar demand patterns. We select a subset of representative nodes in each region to characterize regional pressure conditions for evaluation pur-pose. We select nodes with higher connectivity (degree ≥ 4), nodes located near the geometric center of each region, and junction nodes that serve as critical hubs between neighbor-ing regions. Specifically, we choose 3–4 monitoring nodes per region, resulting in a total set of interest nodes given by Node 111, 113, 159, 201, 209, 117, 115, 121, 119, 193, 189, 191, 225 in Fig. 2. 

Pumps : In NET3, a pump is deployed downstream of each water source and water tank to regulate system inflow and pressure levels. Each pump is characterized by a predefined head–flow performance curve specified by multiple operating points. There are four pumps deployed in our network. The hydraulic characteristics of each pump are specified by a set of discrete head–flow operating points, which are used by EPANET to construct the corresponding pump performance curves. Specifically, pumps located at links 10 , 40 , 50 ,and 20 share an identical characteristic curve defined by three operating points: (Q, H ) = (0 , 500) , (2000 , 300) , and 

(4000 , 100) , where Q denotes the flow rate ( m3/s ) and H

denotes the pump head (m). The pump installed at link 

335 is configured with a higher-capacity characteristic curve given by (Q, H ) = (0 , 500) , (8000 , 138) , and (14000 , 86) ,representing a pump with larger flow capacity and lower head drop rate under high-flow conditions. These heterogeneous pump configurations enable the network to exhibit diverse hydraulic responses under different operating regimes. For all pumps, the initial relative speed is set to 1.0 (base pump speed), and the allowable speed control range is constrained to [0 .3, 3.0] , providing sufficient flexibility for adaptive pressure and flow regulation. 

Valves : PBV valves provide an effective and direct mech-anism for introducing fixed pressure drops to downstream nodes. In the NET3 network, we install PBV valves on four major pipelines including Link 114,175,231,241 , which typically serve as hydraulic hub links connecting different regions of the network. By adjusting the PBV valves, con-trollable pressure drops can be introduced across the selected links, enabling effective regulation of downstream nodal pres-

Fig. 2: Topology of NET3. sure levels. The initial pressure drop of each valve is fixed at 20 psi, and the controllable range is set between 8 psi and 50 psi. 

Tanks : The NET3 network includes three storage tanks, and we install pumps on the downstream pipelines of these tanks. However, instead of explicitly regulating tank operations by our methods, we delegate tank-related pump management to EPANET’s built-in hydraulic rule-based control mechanisms. 

2) Configuration: We adopt the pressure-driven demand (PDA) model in EPANET to more realistically capture the coupling between nodal pressure and actual water supply. Specifically, when the nodal pressure is below the minimum threshold pmin = 0 , no water is delivered to the corresponding node, while full demand satisfaction is achieved when the pressure exceeds the required threshold preq = 60 psi. For intermediate pressure levels, the demand satisfaction is deter-mined by a nonlinear pressure–demand relationship with an exponent parameter pexp = 0 .5.The temporal resolution of the simulation is configured with an hourly demand pattern update interval and a one-hour hydraulic time step. The reporting time step is also set to one hour, ensuring that system states and performance metrics are recorded at the same temporal granularity. The total simulation horizon is specified according to the experimental duration setting. 

B. Datasets 

We adopt the water consumption data from [10], selecting measurements from two academic buildings, one residential area, and one dining facility. The raw data are augmented through scaling to generate sequential demand patterns for each demand node in NET3 (Fig. 2). To simulate demand heterogeneity across different areas, we partition the demand nodes in NET3 into four regions and assign nodes within the same region demand profiles corresponding to the same facility type. For example, Region 1 represents a residential area, and all nodes within this region are assigned demand data from the residential dataset. Variations among nodes within the same region are captured through different scaling factors. After data augmentation, the resulting dataset contains 123 days of hourly demand measurements (i.e., 123 ×24 time steps) for each node in NET3. We split the dataset chronologically, using the first 70% episodes of each node for training and the remaining 30% for testing. 

C. Baselines 

Our baseline methods include a rule-based optimizer (Rule ), a pure ML-based optimizer ( ML ), and the proposed LLM-enhanced ML-based optimizer ( WaterAdmin ). 

Rule : Rule applies the EPANET simulator’s built-in rule-based control for pumps and valves, which determines pump activation or shutdown schedules solely based on whether the real-time nodal water demand exceeds the available supply capacity. 

ML : The ML baseline is implemented using a neural net-work–based optimization framework with a three-layer fully connected feedforward architecture. The model receives the current nodal pressure states and the periodic sinusoidal time embedding of t as input and produces continuous control signals for pump speed regulation and valve actuation. 

WaterAdmin : The WaterAdmin approach extends the 

ML architecture by augmenting the input space with future water demand predictions provided by an LLM agent. Three 

WaterAdmin variants are evaluated with different forecast horizons, denoted as WaterAdmin 2, WaterAdmin 4, and 

WaterAdmin 6, corresponding to 2-hour, 4-hour, and 6-hour prediction windows, respectively. 

D. Additional Details about ML Training 

During training of both WaterAdmin and the ML baseline, the total number of training epochs is fixed to 10, and the num-ber of samples per iteration in the zeroth-order optimization procedure is also set to 10. The standard deviation of Gaussian noise used in the zeroth-order gradient estimation is configured as σ = 0 .05 .Regarding the learning rate configuration, the ML baseline uses a learning rate of 2 × 10 −5, while WaterAdmin 2,

WaterAdmin 4, and WaterAdmin 6 adopt learning rates of 

5×10 −5, 2×10 −4, and 5×10 −4, respectively. Since EPANET simulations are executed on the CPU, zeroth-order optimiza-tion is performed with a batch size of 1, i.e., each training iteration processes one simulation rollout at a time. Finally, stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is used as the optimizer for all experiments. 

E. Prompt Templates 

For event description generation, we use the prompt tem-plate illustrated in Fig. 3. In addition to specifying the building type, date information, and water usage level constraints, we explicitly allow the LLM (GPT-4o) to introduce a certain degree of creative inference about human activity patterns in User Q1 :                                                                                                                                 

> In the following water demand sequence, what event might correspond to each hour?
> You may reasonably infer and introduce plausible community activities (such as
> special events, student gatherings, dining promotions, sports events, or seasonal
> activities) when appropriate, as long as they remain realistic and consistent with
> the observed demand pattern.
> If it's aspecific event, please imagine areasonable name for it.
> You need to describe the changes in water demand in conjunction with the timeline
> of events.
> Building: {building}
> Date: {weekday} -{date}
> The water demand levels you will observe are defined as follows:
> Level 0-No usage or very low usage
> Level 1-Low usage
> Level 2-Typical daily average or normal usage
> Level 3-High usage
> Level 4-Very high usage
> Water demand (24h):
> {level}
> →Agent A1 :The building sees minimal activity, with only afew attendees
> remaining for late sessions.

Fig. 3: Prompt template for event description generation. User Q1 :            

> In the following real -world events, what water demand level
> might correspond to each hour?
> Building: { building}
> Date: { weekday} -{date}
> The water demand levels you will use are defined as follows:
> Level 0 -No usage or very low usage
> Level 1 -Low usage
> Level 2 -Typical daily average or normal usage
> Level 3 -High usage
> Level 4 -Very high usage
> Water demand (24h):
> {events}
> →Agent A1 : [0,0,1,0,2,2,3,3,4,4,2,2,4,4,2,1,1,2,3,4,1,2,1,0]

Fig. 4: Prompt template for water demand forecasting order to enhance the diversity and realism of the generated events. For demand level prediction, to avoid information leakage from the event-generation LLM, we use an LLM API that is different from the one used for event generation. This ensures that no memory or contextual information from the event-generation process is included during demand level prediction and testing. As shown in Fig. 4, we provide the LLM with the event text, building category, and the same set of classification rules. The enforcement of structured output formats for all LLM responses is automatically handled by the LangChain framework. VII. APPENDIX II ADDITIONAL RESULTS 

A. Comparison Among LLMs 

As shown in Table II, we compare the performance of 

WaterAdmin with different LLM agents with the same prediction window of 6 hours. In this table, GPT represent ChatGPT-4o (about 200 billion parameters), GMN represents Gemini-3-flash-preview (Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architec-ture with about 1.2 – 1.7 trillion parameters and 15 – 40 billion active parameters), and DSK represents DeepSeek-V3 (a MoE architecture with 671 billion total parameters and 37B active parameters). The results suggest that the choice of a LLM backbone with higher capacity cannot contributes a better overall performance for the considered setting. One (a) A pressure snapshot of Node 113 (b) Pressure distribution of different methods. (c) Energy consumption distribution of different methods. 

Fig. 5: (a) A snapshot of pressure of Node 113 within 24 hours. (b) Pressure distribution of different methods. (c) Energy consumption distribution of different methods. The green dotted line represents the nominal pressure, the blue dotted line represents the low pressure limit, and the red dotted line represents high pressure limit. GPT represent ChatGPT-4o, GMN represents Gemini-3-flash-preview, and DSK represents DeepSeek-V3. The subscriptions represent the prediction windows (2,4, or 6). TABLE II: Performance comparison of different LLMs.               

> Controller P-MSE Max Viol. (%) Min Viol. (%) Energy (MWh/hour)
> WaterAdmin 6-GPT 0.24 7.57 14.95 0.34
> WaterAdmin 6-GMN 0.24 7.59 14.72 0.34
> WaterAdmin 6-DSK 0.25 7.56 15.03 0.34

possible reason is that water demand is discretized into only five levels, which may limit the extent to which the capabilities of larger LLMs can be fully exploited for more precise water demand prediction. Nevertheless, it shows that 

WaterAdmin performs very well even with a relatively small LLM ChatGPT-4o, which owes to the in-context prompting technique to select diverse and most representative exemplary prompts and the CoT prompting that guide the LLM agents to perform reasoning. 

B. A Snapshot of Pressure Change 

In Fig. 5(a), we provide a snapshot of Node 113 in NET3 (Fig. 2) showing the sequence of node pressure regulated by different approaches. We can find that, WaterAdmin 

outperforms ML in maintaining the pressure around 60 psi. This demonstrates the effectiveness of community context abstraction by LLM agents in improving the water distribution operation performance. 

C. Distribution of Pressure and Energy Consumption 

The distributions of the performance metrics including pressure and energy consumption are shown in the box plot of Fig. 5(c). It provide more details about the performance of different methods among different nodes in various instances. We can also observe that the impact of different LLM back-bones on the performance of WaterAdmin is not obvious for the considered setting. In contrast, the length of the prediction window plays a more influential role. As the prediction horizon becomes shorter, the control performance degrades, which in turn leads to increased deviation from the nominal pressure and energy consumption.