Title: 2603.25093v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25093v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:36:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
Process -Aware AI for Rainfall –Runoff Modeling: A Mass -Conserving Neural 

# Framework with Hydrological Process Constraints 

## Mohammad A. Farmani 1, Hoshin V. Gupta , Ali Behrangi 1, 2, Muhammad Jawad 1, Sadaf Moghisi 1,

## Guo -Yue Niu 1

> 1

## Department of Hydrology and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, 

> 2

## Department of Geosciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA, 

## Contact: farmani@arizona.edu 

## Submitted to arXiv 

Key Points: 

• Embedding hydrological process constraints within a mass -conserving AI framework improves 

interpretable rainfall –runoff prediction. 

• Incorporating v ertical drainage strongly improves performance in arid and snow -dominated 

basins but reduces skill in rainfall -dominated regions. 

• Process -aware AI models can approach deep -learning predictive skill while retaining physically -

interpretable storage –flux dynamics. Abstract 

Machine learning models can achieve high predictive accuracy in hydrological applications but often lack 

physical interpretability. The Mass -Conserving Perceptron (MCP) provides a physics -aware artificial 

intelligence (AI) framework that enforces conservation principles while allowing hydrological process 

relationships to be learned from data. 

In this study, we investigate how progressively embedding physically meaningful representations of 

hydrological processes within a single MCP storage unit improves predictive skill and interpretability in 

rainfall –runoff modeling. Starting from a minimal MCP formulation, we sequentially introduce bounded 

soil storage, state -dependent conductivity, varia ble porosity, infiltration capacity, surface ponding, 

vertical drainage, and nonlinear water -table dynamics. 

The resulting hierarchy of process -aware MCP models is evaluated across 15 catchments spanning five 

hydroclimatic regions of the continental United States using daily streamflow prediction as the target .

Results show that progressively augmenting the internal physical structure of the MCP unit generally 

improves predictive performance. The influence of boundary conditions is strongly hydroclimate 

dependent: vertical drainage substantially improves model skill in arid and snow -dominated basins but 

reduces performance in rainfall -dominated regions, while surface ponding has comparatively small 

effects. 

The best -performing MCP configurations approach the predictive skill of a Long Short -Term Memory 

benchmark while maintaining explicit physical interpretability. These results demonstrate that embedding 

hydrological process constraints within AI architectur es provides a promising pathway toward 

interpretable and process -aware rainfall –runoff modeling. 

Plain Language Summary 

Machine learning (ML) models are increasingly used to predict river flow because they can learn complex 

patterns from data. However, these models often behave like “ black boxes ,” making it difficult to 

understand their representation of how water moves through a watershed. In contrast, t raditional 

physical -based (PB) hydrological models are easier to interpret (because they represent physical 

processes such as soil storage and runoff generation ) but may be less capable of expressing complex 

relationships. 

In this study, we combine ideas from both ML and PB approaches by developing a hybrid model that 

conserves water mass and includes physically meaningful hydrological processes , and progressively add 

processes such as limits on soil water storage, infiltration controls, surface ponding, and deep drainage. 

Test ing on 15 river basins that represent a wide range of climate conditions across the United States 

reveals that a dding key physical processes improves streamflow predictions, with process importance 

var ying by region. Representing deep drainage substantially improves predictions in arid and snow -

dominated basins but can reduce performance in humid regions. These findings show that AI models can 

remain physically -interpretable while achieving predictive skill comparable to modern deep -learning 

approaches. 1 Introduction 

[1]  Rainfall –runoff (RR) models provide the foundation for understanding and predicting catchment -

scale hydrological responses , while support ing applications such as flood forecasting, drought assessment, 

and water resources management. Over the past several decades, hydrological modeling has evolved 

from spatially -lumped conceptual approaches toward semi -distributed and physically -based frameworks 

that explicitly represent processes such as infiltration, evapotranspiration, and subsurface flow (Gupta et 

al., 1998; Burnash, 1973; Bergström, 1995 ). More recent high -resolution distributed and land surface 

models incorporate spatial heterogeneity and coupled water –energy dynamics, extending applicability 

across diverse hydroclimatic regimes (Burnash, 1973; Niu et al., 2011; Agnihotri et al., 2023; Solomon et 

al., 2024; Farmani et al., 2024; Farmani et al., 2025 ).

[2]  Despite these advances, RR modeling continues to face a fundamental challenge: achieving 

predictive accuracy while maintaining physical realism and interpretability. Physical -conceptual models 

rely on simplified process representations and parameter calibrat ion , which can limit transferability under 

changing climatic conditions and across catchments (Beven, 2006; Gupta et al., 2009 ). Physically -based 

models offer greater process realism but require extensive data, substantial computational resources, and 

their parameterizations remain uncertain (Clark et al., 2015a; Clark et al., 2015b; Addor and Melsen, 2019; 

Nearing et al., 2021 ). Model performance is further influenced by input uncertainty, parameter 

equifinality, and incomplete representation of key processes such as subsurface flow and snow dynamics 

(Beven, 2006; Kirchner, 2006; Moghisi et al., 2024 ). Consequently, hydrological modeling remains 

characterized by trade -offs among complexity, interpretability, and predictive skill. 

[3]  To address limitations of traditional approaches, data -driven methods — based particularly in 

machine learning (ML) — have gained increasing attention. Deep learning (DL) architectures, including 

recurrent neural networks and Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM) models, learn nonlinear relationships 

between meteorological inputs and streamflow without explicitly representing individual process 

equations. These models often achieve strong predictive performance across diverse basins and large -

sample datasets such as CAMELS (Kratzert et al., 2018; Kratzert et al., 2019 ), and t heir ability to capture 

temporal dependencies and leverage large training datasets has demonstrated the potential of ML to 

advance regional and continental -scale hydrologic prediction. 

[4]  However, data -driven models can function as “black boxes ”, with t heir internal representations 

being difficult to interpret in physical terms, raising concerns about extrapolation under non -stationary 

climate conditions and limiting their usefulness for scientific understanding (Shen, 2018; Reichstein et al., 

2019; Beven, 2020 ). ML models may also violate physical constraints, such as conservation of mass, or 

compensate for structural deficiencies through parameter adjustments that are uninterpretable 

(Karpatne et al., 2017; Willard et al., 2022 ). These limitations highlight the need for modeling frameworks 

that achieve the predictive capability of ML w hile maintaining physical consistency and interpretability. 

[5]  Physics -Informed Machine Learning (PIML) represents one response to this need. PIML approaches 

incorporate physical laws, constraints, or structural knowledge into the learning process to guide model 

behavior (Karpatne et al., 2017; Reichstein et al., 2019; Willard et al., 2022 ). For example, Physics -

Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) embed governing equations within the loss function to enforce 

conservation principles (Raissi et al., 2019 ). In hydrology, related efforts enforce mass balance, constrain 

process behavior, or integrate neural networks with process -based components (Read et al., 2019; Feng 

et al., 2020; Jia et al., 2021 ). While these approaches improve physical consistency, physical knowledge is 

often introduced as soft constraints or external regularization , rather than being embedded directly into 

the computational structure. As a result, learned internal states and fluxes do not necessarily correspond 

to physically meaningful quantities. [6]  Differentiable Hydrology extends this line of development by reformulating process -based models 

as mathematically -differentiable systems that can be trained using gradient -based optimization (Tsai et 

al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023 ). This framework enables end -to -end parameter learning and hybrid 

architectures that combine mechanistic equations with neural network components. Dynamic 

parameterization has been proposed to represent time -varying processes such as vegetation dynamics 

an d snow interactions (Feng et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2023; Song et al., 2025 ). Although these methods 

improve predictive performance, dynamically learned parameters may lack physical identifiability or 

compensate for structural deficiencies, limiting interpretability and mechanistic insight. 

[7]  The Mass -Conserving Perceptron (MCP) provides an alternative approach that embeds physical 

constraints directly within the computational architecture. It was introduced to address a key limitation 

of DL in hydrology: while gated recurrent neural networks achieve high predictive accuracy, their internal 

states and fluxes lack physical interpretability. Wang and Gupta (2024a) reformulated gated recurrent 

units into mass -conserving computational units whose state variables and fluxes explicitly satisfy 

conservatio n principles. MCP units are isomorphically related to gated RNN cells but are recast so that 

storage and flux components correspond to physically -interpretable quantities, enabling hypothesis 

testing within a differentiable framework. 

[8]  Subsequent work extended this formulation by assembling MCP units into directed -graph 

architectures resembling conceptual RR models (Wang and Gupta, 2024b ). These studies demonstrated 

that mass -conserving architectures can achieve competitive predictive performance while retaining 

interpretability and enabling systematic exploration of structural hypotheses. More recent developments 

emphasized parsimony and minimally -optimal representations, arguing that model complexity should be 

aligned with dominant hydrological processes (Wang and Gupta, 2025 ). A large -sample CONUS -wide 

evaluation further showed that MCP -based interpretable models can approach LSTM -level predictive skill 

while highlighting the trade -off between accuracy and architectural complexity across hydroclimatic 

regimes (Wang and Gupta, 2025 ).

[9]  While the MCP framework provides an appealing foundation for interpretable hydrological ML , an 

important question remains unresolved: 

How much physical process representation should be embedded within the model structure? 

A minimal MCP formulation can represent storage –flux dynamics in a highly flexible way, but it may lack 

explicit representations of key hydrological processes such as infiltration capacity limits, ponding, 

groundwater drainage, and soil -water storage const raints. Conversely, introducing too many process 

representations may increase structural complexity without improving predictive skill. 

[10]  In this study, we investigate how progressively embedding physically -meaningful hydrological 

processes within an MCP architecture influences RR modeling performance. Starting from a minimal MCP 

formulation, we sequentially introduce additional physical constraints and process representations to 

construct a hierarchy of process -aware mass -conserving AI models . These progressively -augmented MCP 

architecture s incorporate hydrological mechanisms including bounded soil storage, state -dependent 

hydraulic conducti vity, infiltration capacity limits, surface ponding, vertical drainage, and nonlinear water -

table behavior. The resulting models represent a continuum between flexible data -driven learning and 

physically -interpretable hydrological modeling. 

[11]  Performance of the models is evaluated across 15 catchments spanning five major hydroclimatic 

regimes of the continental United States (CONUS) , including arid, snow -dominated, and rainfall -

dominated systems. Predictive performance is assessed using daily streamflow simulation and compared 

against a benchmark LSTM model trained with the same meteorological inputs. In addition to evaluating 

overall predictive skill, we examine how model behavior varies across fl ow regimes, how boundary -condition assumptions influence performance, and how the learned storage –flux relationships reflect 

hydrological processes. 

[12]  The central hypothesis of this work is that :

Embedding physically -meaningful hydrological processes within a mass -conserving AI 

architecture can improve predictive skill while preserving interpretability .

By systematically analyzing the influence of progressive process augmentation across diverse 

hydroclimatic regimes, this study aims to clarify how process -aware ML frameworks can bridge the gap 

between traditional hydrological models and purely data -driven approaches. 

## 2 Methods 

[13]  This study develops a physically -interpretable hydrological modeling framework based on the MCP 

architecture and evaluates how progressively embedding hydrologically -meaningful processes within a 

single storage unit influences model behavior and predictive skill. The framework is constructed by 

systematically augmenting the internal dynamics of an MCP storage unit to represent key hydrological 

mechanisms, resulting in a hierarchy of progressively more physically -informed models. In addition to 

internal process representations, alternative boundary -cond ition configurations are introduced to 

account for surface ponding and vertical drainage . Together, these structural components define a 

structured experimental space that enables systematic investigation of how internal soil processes and 

boundary conditions influence rainfall –runoff dynamics. 

[14]  The following sub -sections first introduce the MCP framework used in this study (Section 2.1) . We 

then describe :

(i)  Progressive augmentation of the MCP storage unit to represent key hydrological processes 

(Section 2.2) 

(ii)  Representation of surface ponding and vertical drainage processes (Section 2.3) 

(iii)  The resulting model configuration space (Section 2.4) , and 

(iv)  The datasets, experimental design, training procedures, and evaluation metrics used to assess 

model performance (Section 2.5) .

2.1 The Mass -Conserving Perceptron (MCP) 

[15]  The MCP is a mathematically -differentiable computational unit designed to integrate physical 

consistency with data -driven learning by explicitly enforcing conservation laws within its 

architecture (Wang and Gupta, 2024a ). Unlike conventional neural network units, which operate as 

abstract nonlinear transformations, the MCP is formulated as a storage –flux system in which the internal 

state represents a physically -interpretable storage variable and all incoming and outgoing fluxes are 

explicitly accounted for. 

[16]  Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a single MCP unit. The system is characterized by a storage state 

𝑋 𝑡  that evolves in discrete time in response to external inputs and outgoing fluxes. The temporal evolution 

of storage is governed by a mass balance equation: 

𝑋 𝑡 +1 = 𝑋 𝑡 + 𝑈 𝑡 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

− 𝑂 𝑡 − 𝐿 𝑡  (Eq 1) 

where  𝑋 𝑡 +1 denotes storage at the next time step,  𝑈 𝑡  represents external input (e.g., precipitation),  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑈

is an input gate controlling the fraction of input entering storage,  𝑂 𝑡  denotes output flux (e.g., 

streamflow), and  𝐿 𝑡  represents loss flux (e.g., evapotranspiration). [17]  Outgoing fluxes are modeled as proportional to the current storage: 

𝑂 𝑡 = 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

𝑋 𝑡  (Eq 2) 

𝐿 𝑡 = 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐿

𝑋 𝑡  (Eq 3) 

Substituting into the mass balance gives :

𝑋 𝑡 +1 = 𝑋 𝑡 + 𝑈 𝑡 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

− 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

𝑋 𝑡 − 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐿

𝑋 𝑡  (Eq 4) 

which can be rewritten as :

𝑋 𝑡 +1 = 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑅

𝑋 𝑡 + 𝑈 𝑡 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

(Eq 5) 

where  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑅

= 1 − 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑂

− 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐿

represents the retention gate. The gating variables  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑈

, 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

, and  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐿

are 

constrained to lie within the interval [0,1] , ensuring physically -meaningful partitioning of mass. By 

construction, the sum of outgoing and retained fractions equals unity, guaranteeing that total mass is 

conserved at each time step (Wang and Gupta, 2024a ).

[18]  The gating functions are parameterized using differentiable transformations. For example :

𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑂

= 𝜎 (𝑏 𝑂 + 𝑎 𝑂 𝑋 𝑡 ̃ ) (Eq 6) 

where  𝑎 𝑂  and  𝑏 𝑂  are learnable parameters and  𝑋 𝑡 ̃ is a scaled storage state. This structure makes the MCP 

isomorphically related to gated recurrent neural networks, while ensuring that internal states and fluxes 

retain direct physical interpretation (Wang and Gupta, 2024b ). Because conservation is embedded 

directly in the computational architecture rather than imposed through external constraints, the MCP 

provides a physically -interpretable recurrent unit that remains fully differentiable and trainable. 

Figure 1. Schematic of a single Mass -Conserving Perceptron (MCP) unit. The internal state 

𝑋 𝑡  represents storage, which evolves according to a mass balance equation. Incoming 

input  𝑈 𝑡  enters the storage through the input gate  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑈

. Outgoing fluxes are partitioned into 

output  𝑂 𝑡  (controlled by  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

) and loss  𝐿 𝑡  (controlled by  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝐿

). The retention gate  𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑅

represents the fraction of storage retained between time steps. All fluxes are explicitly 

accounted for, ensuring conservation of mass at the unit level. 

Table 1. Key symbols used in the MCP framework and augmented model formulations. 

Symbol  Description 

𝑿 𝒕  MCP storage state 

𝑼 𝒕  precipitation input 

𝑶 𝒕  baseflow / discharge flux 𝑳 𝒕  evapotranspiration loss 

𝑹 𝒕  

> 𝑺𝑬

saturation -excess runoff 

𝑹 𝒕  

> 𝑰𝑬

infiltration -excess runoff 

𝑽 𝒕  vertical drainage 

𝜽 𝒕  soil water storage 

𝜽 𝒎𝒂𝒙  maximum soil storage 

𝜽 𝒎𝒊𝒏  wilting storage 

𝜽 𝒂  available soil water 

𝑯 𝒔𝒐𝒊𝒍  soil thickness 

 porosity 

𝒔 𝒕  soil saturation state 

𝑮 𝒕  

> 𝑼

infiltration gate 

𝑮 𝒕  

> 𝑶

baseflow gate 

𝑮 𝒕  

> 𝑽

vertical drainage gate 

2.2 Progressive Physical Augmentation of the MCP Storage Unit 

[19]  In its original formulation, the MCP represents a generic mass -conserving storage unit that learns 

flux -partitioning directly from data. In this study, we progressively embed physically -meaningful 

hydrological processes within a single MCP storage unit in order to improve interpretability while 

preserving mathematical -differentiability and strict conservation of mass. The augmentation strategy is 

designed to isolate the influence of individual hydrological processes on model behavior. Each successive 

model architecture introduces a single additional process representation while preserving all previously 

introduced mechanisms. This design enables systematic evaluation of how increasing physical realism 

within a single MCP storage unit influences predictive skill and hydrological behavior. Th e resulting 

hierarchy consists of five progressively -augmented models (M1 –M5) developed under a baseline 

configuration without surface ponding or vertical drainage (NP). Figure 2 illustrates the structural 

evolution of the MCP storage unit as additional hydrological processes are incorporated .

Table 2: Progressive process augmentation of the MCP storage unit under the baseline NP 

configuration .

Model  New process introduced  Hydrological interpretation 

M1  bounded soil bucket  conceptual soil bucket 

M2  State -dependent conductivity  moisture -controlled drainage 

M3  Variable porosity  volumetric soil storage capacity 

M4  Infiltration capacity & Horton runoff  infiltration -excess runoff generation 

M5  Nonlinear water table dynamics  partial saturation and internal redistribution 2.2.1 Baseline Soil Bucket Representation (M1) 

[20]  We reinterpret the MCP storage state  𝑋 𝑡  as soil water storage  𝜃 𝑡 , representing water held within an 

effective soil bucket. The soil bucket is defined by upper and lower storage bounds :

𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝐻 𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙 .

, 𝑟 𝑝 = 𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛 

> 𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥

(Eq 7) 

where  𝐻 𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙  [L] is soil thickness, 

 [–] is porosity,  𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥  [L] is maximum storage capacity, and  𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛  [L] is 

minimum storage corresponding to the wilting threshold . In this study,  𝐻 𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙  is obtained from CAMELS 

static attributes, and  𝑟 𝑝  is fixed at 0.1 across basins, so  𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛 = 0.1 𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥 .

[21]  For M1 and M2, we set 

 = 1, yielding a conceptual soil “ tank ” representation . In later models we 

allow 

 < 1, which converts the tank into a volumetric soil -column representation by explicitly defining 

pore space .

[22]  The degree of saturation is defined as :

𝑠 𝑡 = 𝜃 𝑡 −𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛 

> 𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥 −𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛

(Eq 8) 

which normalizes soil water content to [0,1] and provides a physically -interpretable state variable used to 

drive gating functions. 

[23]  Accordingly, t he M1 mass balance becomes :

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = 𝜃 𝑡 + 𝑈 𝑡 − 𝑂 𝑡 − 𝐿 𝑡 − 𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

(Eq 9) 

where  𝑈 𝑡  is precipitation input,  𝑂 𝑡  is baseflow (slow drainage) , 𝐿 𝑡  is evapotranspiration loss , and  𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

is 

saturation -excess runoff . Saturation -excess runoff occurs when incoming water pushes storage beyond 

𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥  , with the excess routed t o 𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

to maintain physical bounds. 

[24]  Finally, t he extractable water available for drainage and evapotranspiration is :

𝜃 𝑎 = 𝜃 𝑡 − 𝜃 𝑚𝑖𝑛  (Eq 10) 

2.2.2 Representation of Horizontal -Drainage Baseflow in M1 

[25]  In M1, baseflow is modeled using a constant horizontal -drainage conductivity parameter to isolate 

the effect of state -independent drainage rate :

𝑂 𝑡 = 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

. 𝜃 𝑎  with  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑂

= 𝐾 𝑠𝑎𝑡  (Eq 11) 

where  𝐾 𝑠𝑎𝑡  is a (learnable or prescribed) saturated hydraulic conductivity coefficient. This formulation 

produces drainage at a rate that is linear ly proportional to available soil water .Figure 2. Conceptual evolution of the MCP storage unit as progressively richer physical 

constraints are introduced (M1 –M5) under the no -ponding, no -drainage (NP) configuration. 

Starting from a bounded soil bucket (M1), subsequent models incorporate state -dependent 

conductivity (M2), volumetric soil capacity through porosity (M3), infiltration capacity and 

infiltration -excess runoff (M4), and nonlinear water -table dynamics repres enting partial 

saturation and internal redistribution (M5). The diagrams illustrate how ph ysically -

interpretable processes are embedded within the MCP storage unit while maintaining mass 

conservation. 

2.2.3 Evapotranspiration as Root -Weighted Extraction 

[26]  Evapotranspiration is represented consistently across all models and scenarios by converting 

atmospheric demand ( PET ) into soil water extraction limited by soil moisture availability and root 

distribution. 

𝐿 𝑡 = min (𝜃 𝑎 , 𝐸 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑 ) (Eq 12) 

𝐸 𝑑𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑 = 𝑃𝐸𝑇 . 𝑅 𝑡 

> 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡

. (𝑠 𝑡 )𝑏 𝐿  (Eq 13) 

where PET is potential evapotranspiration,  𝑏 𝐿  is a moisture -stress exponent, and  𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡

is a normalized 

root -uptake fraction. [27]  Although the experiments in this paper use a single soil layer, we formulate root uptake using a 

general N -layer form so the framework can be extended to multilayer representations , Figure 3 . For layer 

𝑗  with depth coordinate  𝑧 𝑗 , we define an un -normalized root fraction: 

𝑅 𝑗  

> 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐

= 𝜎 (𝑚 𝐿 . 𝑧 𝑗 ̌ − 𝑐 𝐿 ) (Eq 14) 

and normalize across N layers: 

𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡

= 𝑅 𝑗  

> 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐
> ∑𝑅 𝑗
> 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐 )𝑁
> 𝑗 =1

(Eq 1 5)

[28]  Figure 3 illustrates the normalized root profile for N= 3.

Figure 3. Conceptual root distribution used to represent evapotranspiration extraction 

within the soil column. The blue curve shows the normalized root density profile as a 

function of depth. The soil column is divided into three conceptual layers, each receiving 

a fraction  𝐴 𝑗  of the total root uptake such that ∑ 𝐴 𝑗  

> 𝑁
> 𝑗 =1

= 1. In this study the formulation 

is written for a general multilayer representation, although simulations are performed 

using a single effective layer. 

2.2.4 State -Dependent Baseflow Via Moisture -Controlled Conductivity (M2 –M5) 

[29]  In real soils, hydraulic conductivity depends on moisture state through soil water pressure head. To 

represent this behavior without introducing unconstrained “ dynamic parameters ,” we model conductivity 

as a state -dependent gating function that maps the ( physically -interpretable ) saturation state to an 

effective conductivity. For models M2 –M5, baseflow is computed as: 

𝑂 𝑡 = 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑂

. 𝐷 𝑡  (Eq 16) 

𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑂

= 𝐾 𝑠𝑎𝑡 . 𝜎 (𝑎 𝑂 . 𝑥 ℎ̌ − 𝑏 𝑂 ) (Eq 17) 

where  𝑎 𝑂  and  𝑏 𝑂  are learnable gate parameters and  𝑥 ℎ̌ is a scaled water -table activation variable. Water -

table height is defined as :

ℎ = 𝐻 ∗ 𝑠 𝑡  

> 𝑏 𝑤

(Eq 18) 

where  𝑏 𝑤  is a water -table shape parameter. The active drainage zone depth is :𝐷𝑟 = 𝐻 − 𝑇  (Eq 19) 

[30]  The water -table activation variable becomes :

𝑥 ℎ = max (0, ℎ−𝑇  

> 𝐷𝑟

) (Eq 20) 

and drainable water is defined as :

𝐷 𝑡 = max (0, (ℎ − 𝑇 ) ∗ 𝜃 𝑎  

> 𝐻

) (Eq 21) 

where  𝑇  represents a threshold water -table height required to activate significant drainage . The use of  𝐷 𝑡 

ensures that baseflow depends on both (i) the extent of saturated storage above T and (ii) the available 

water  𝜃 𝑎 .

2.2.5 Water Table Representation (M5) 

[31]  For M2 –M4 we set  𝑏 𝑤 = 1, yielding a linear relationship between saturation and water -table height, 

consistent with common conceptualizations that assume uniform moisture distribution within a bucket. 

For M5 we allow  𝑏 𝑤 > 1, which produces a non -linear mapping and implies non -uniform vertical water 

distribution, with a partially saturated lower zone and an un -saturated upper zone ( Figure 2 , M5_NP). This 

modification enables a simple representation of a dynamic water table and internal redistribution within 

a single storage unit. 

2.2.6 Variable Porosity (M3) 

[32]  In M1 and M2,  𝜌 = 1 results in a conceptual tank with water -holding capacity determined by  𝐻 𝑠𝑜𝑖𝑙  .

In M3 and higher, we allow  𝜌 < 1, which explicitly represents pore space and converts the conceptual 

tank into a volumetric soil layer . Storage capacity therefore becomes directly dependent on soil porosity. 

2.2.7 Infiltration Capacity and Infiltration -Excess Runoff (M4 –M5) 

[33]  To represent infiltration limitation a nd infiltration -excess runoff generation, precipitation is 

partitioned using an input gate :

𝐼 𝑡 = 𝑈 𝑡 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

where  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

= 𝜎 (𝑎 𝑈 𝑠 𝑡 ̃ − 𝑏 𝑈 ) (Eq 22) 

𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝐼𝐸

= 𝑈 𝑡 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐼𝐸

where  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝐼𝐸

= 1 − 𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

(Eq 23) 

where  𝑎 𝑈  and  𝑏 𝑈  are learnable parameters and  𝑠 𝑡 ̃ is a scaled saturation state. This design enforces 

physically -interpretable behavior: as the soil approaches saturation,  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

decreases, limiting infiltration and 

increasing infiltration -excess runoff. When the soil is dry,  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

increases (maximum), allowing most 

incoming water to infiltrate, subject to available storage capacity (with any additional excess still 

contributing to  𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

once  𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥  is reached). 

2.3 Representation of Surface Ponding (PND) 

[34]  To represent temporary surface water storage and delayed runoff generation, we extend the 

previous set of “ non -ponding ” models by introducing a surface ponding layer. This boundary -condition 

scenario is referred to as PND , and the resulting models are denoted M1_PND t o M5_PND (Figure 4 ). 

[35]  A surface storage state , 𝑆 𝑡  

> 𝑃𝑁𝐷

is introduced to represent water temporarily stored above the soil 

column. The ponding storage evolves according to :

𝑆 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑃𝑁𝐷

= 𝑆 𝑡  

> 𝑃𝑁𝐷

+ 𝑈 𝑡 − 𝐼 𝑡 − 𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

(Eq 24) 

where  𝑈 𝑡  is incoming precipitation,  𝐼 𝑡  is infiltration into the soil column, and  𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

is saturation -excess 

runoff generated when the ponding storage exceeds its capacity .[36]  In the PND configuration, infiltration depends on the total water available at the surface, consisting 

of both precipitation and previously ponded water: 

𝐼 𝑡 = (𝑆 𝑡  

> 𝑃𝑁𝐷

+ 𝑈 𝑡 )𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑈

(Eq 25) 

This formulation ensures that infiltration decreases as the soil approaches saturation, consistent with 

physical expectations. 

## [37]  When surface storage exceeds the maximum ponding capacity  𝑆 𝑚𝑎𝑥 

> 𝑃𝑁𝐷

, the excess is routed to 

saturation -excess runoff . This mechanism allows the model to represent delayed runoff generation 

## while preserving mass conservation. 

[38]  Water infiltrating from the ponding layer contributes to soil storage according to :

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = 𝜃 𝑡 + 𝐼 𝑡 − 𝑂 𝑡 − 𝐿 𝑡  (Eq 26 )

while the baseflow and evapotranspiration formulations remain unchanged from the NP configuration. 

Thus, the PND scenario introduces an intermediate surface storage that regulates how precipitation 

enters the soil column, allowing the model to represent short -term surface water accumulation and 

delayed infiltration without altering the internal soil -pro cess structure .

Figure 4 Model configurations including surface ponding (PND). Precipitation first 

accumulates in a temporary surface storage before infiltrating into the soil column or 

generating saturation -excess runoff. The five panels correspond to progressively augmented MCP models (M1 –M5) that incorporate bounded soil storage, state -dependent 

baseflow, variable porosity, infiltration capacity, and nonlinear water -table dynamics. 

2.4 Representation of Vertical Drainage (DR) 

[39]  To represent deep percolation below the modeled soil column, we introduce a free vertical drainage 

mechanism referred to as the DR configuration. A n additional downward flux  𝑉 𝑡  removes water from the 

modeled soil storage and represents losses to deeper subsurface layers or recharge to groundwater 

storage outside the modeled system ( Figure 5 ). 

[40]  The soil water balance is modified as :

𝜃 𝑡 +1 = 𝜃 𝑡 + 𝑈 𝑡 − 𝑂 𝑡 − 𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

− 𝑉 𝑡 − 𝐿 𝑡  (Eq 27 )

where  𝑉 𝑡  is the vertical drainage flux , defined as: 

𝑉 𝑡 = 𝐺 𝑡 

> 𝑉

𝜃 𝑎  (Eq 28 )

and  𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑉

is the vertical drainage gate , parameterized as :

𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑉

= 𝜎 (𝑎 𝑉 𝑠 𝑡 ̃ − 𝑏 𝑉 ) (Eq 29 )

where  𝑎 𝑉  and  𝑏 𝑉  are learnable parameters . This formulation allows the model to learn how vertical 

drainage varies with soil moisture state, with drainage generally increasing as saturation increases .

[41]  The DR configuration does not alter the internal process formulations for baseflow, 

evapotranspiration, or surface runoff; it adds an additional lower -boundary loss pathway through which 

water can leave the soil column. Applying this mechanism to the previously defined model hierarchy yields 

the corresponding drainage -enabled models M1_DR to M5_DR , allowing investigation of how deep 

percolation influences streamflow prediction across hydroclimatic regimes. Figure 5 Model configurations including free vertical drainage (DR) with no ponding. An 

additional downward flux  𝑉 𝑡  represents water draining from the bottom of the soil column 

to deeper subsurface storage. The drainage flux is controlled by a vertical drainage gate 

𝐺 𝑡  

> 𝑉

and depends on the available soil water above the wilting threshold. The panels 

illustrate the DR extension for the five progressively augmented MCP models (M1 –M5). 

Blue elements denote storage and inflow processes, while red elements represent 

outgoing f luxes including baseflow ( 𝑂 𝑡 ), evapotranspiration ( 𝐿 𝑡 ), saturation -excess runoff 

(𝑅 𝑡  

> 𝑆𝐸

), infiltration -excess runoff ( 𝑅 𝑡 

> 𝐼𝐸

), and vertical drainage ( 𝑉 𝑡 ). 

2.5 Model Scenario Combinations and Experimental Design 

[42]  The process representations described above define a hierarchy of internal soil -process models 

(M1 –M5) and a set of alternative boundary -condition scenarios controlling how water enters and exits 

the soil column. Together, these dimensions define the full experimental space explored in this study. 

[43]  The internal soil -process hierarchy progressively augments the MCP storage unit with additional 

hydrological mechanisms, beginning with a bounded soil bucket representation (M1) and culminating in 

a formulation that includes state -dependent conductivity, v ariable soil porosity, infiltration capacity, and 

nonlinear water -table dynamics (M5). Each successive model therefore increases the level of physical 

realism embedded within the MCP storage unit while maintaining the same computational structure. [44]  In addition to internal process representations, four boundary -condition scenarios are considered 

that determine how water interacts with the soil column: 

• NP (No Ponding, No Drainage): Precipitation interacts directly with the soil storage and no vertical 

drainage is allowed. 

• PND (Surface Ponding): A temporary surface storage layer is introduced, allowing precipitation 

to accumulate before infiltrating into the soil column or producing surface runoff. 

• NP –DR (Free Vertical Drainage): An additional downward flux allows water to drain from the 

bottom of the soil column, representing deep percolation beyond the modeled soil layer. 

• PND –DR (Combined Configuration): Both surface ponding and vertical drainage are activated 

simultaneously. 

[45]  Combining the five internal soil -process models with the four boundary -condition scenarios results 

in a total of 20 model configurations evaluated in this study: 

5 model structures × 4 scenarios = 20 models 

This structured experimental design enables systematic evaluation of how progressively -increasing 

physical realism influences model behavior and predictive performance across diverse hydroclimatic 

environments. Specifically, the framework allows assessment of the: 

(i)  Impact of progressively embedding hydrological processes within a single MCP storage unit 

(ii)  Influence of surface boundary conditions on infiltration and runoff generation, and 

(iii)  Role of vertical drainage in regulating soil water dynamics and streamflow response. 

Table 3. Experimental model configurations resulting from combinations of the five 

internal soil -process models and four boundary -condition scenarios. 

Soil Model  NP  PND  NP -DR  PND -DR 

M1  M1_NP  M1_PND  M1_NP -DR  M1_PND -DR 

M2  M2_NP  M2_PND  M2_NP -DR  M2_PND -DR 

M3  M3_NP  M3_PND  M3_NP -DR  M3_PND -DR 

M4  M4_NP  M4_PND  M4_NP -DR  M4_PND -DR 

M5  M5_NP  M5_PND  M5_NP -DR  M5_PND -DR 

2.6 Study area 

[46]  All experiments in this study were conducted using data from 15 catchments selected from the 

CAMELS (Catchment Attributes and Meteorology for Large -sample Studies) dataset (Addor et al., 2017 ).

CAMELS provides meteorological forcings, streamflow observations, and catchment attributes for 

hundreds of basins across the contiguous United States and has become a widely used benchmark dataset 

for large -sample hydrological modeling. 

[47]  The selected catchments span five major hydroclimatic regions , including arid, snow -dominated, 

and rainfall -dominated regimes across both western and eastern portions of the United States. These 

basins were chosen to represent a broad range of climatic and hydrological conditions, allowing the 

proposed modeling fram ework to be evaluated across diverse environmental settings ( Figure 6 ). [48]  For each catchment, the dataset provides daily time series of mean areal precipitation ( P, mm day⁻¹), 

potential evapotranspiration ( PET , mm day⁻¹), and observed streamflow ( Q, mm day⁻¹). The available data 

span the period 1980 –2014. Following common practice in hydrological modeling studies, the time series 

were divided into three periods:  

> •

Training period: 1987 –2004  

> •

Validation period: 1980 –1987  

> •

Testing period: 2004 –2014 

A three -year spin -up period was applied at the beginning of each simulation to minimize the influence of 

initial storage conditions. Model performance is evaluated exclusively on the test period, which is not 

used during model calibration or validation, thereby providing an independ ent assessment of predictive 

performance. 

[49]  In the simulations, total streamflow is computed as the sum of surface runoff and baseflow 

generated by the model storage unit. Because the focus of this study is on the internal hydrological 

processes represented within the storage unit, no routing scheme is applied between the modeled runoff 

components and the observed discharge. 

Figure 6. Locations of the 15 selected CAMELS catchments representing five major 

hydroclimatic regions across the contiguous United States. 

2.7 Training Procedure 

[50]  Model parameters were optimized using gradient -based learning with the Adam optimizer . Each 

model was trained for 1000 epochs , although convergence was typically achieved after approximately 500 

epochs . To account for sensitivity to initialization and learning -rate selection, the training procedure was 

conducted in two stages :(i) Initial parameter exploration : Each model was first trained using 30 different random seeds .

During this stage, the learning rate was set to 0.1 , and a dynamic learning -rate schedule was 

applied using a learning -rate decay factor of 0.75 . Model performance on the validation period 

was used to select the best parameter set among the 30 runs based on the Kling –Gupta Efficiency 

score (KGE) (Gupta et al., 2009 ).

(ii) Learning -rate refinement : The selected parameter set for each catchment and model was then 

used as the initial condition for a second training phase. In this stage, 10 additional simulations 

were conducted using different learning rates: 

[𝟎 . 𝟎𝟎𝟏 , 𝟎 . 𝟎𝟏 , 𝟎 . 𝟏 , 𝟎 . 𝟐 , 𝟎 . 𝟑 , 𝟎 . 𝟒 , 𝟎 . 𝟓 , 𝟎 . 𝟔 , 𝟎 . 𝟕 , 𝟎 . 𝟖 ]

Combining the initial exploration and refinement phases resulted in 40 training runs per catchment and 

model configuration . The parameter set yielding the highest validation KGE score was selected as the final 

calibrated model for that catchment. 

2.8 LSTM Benchmark Model 

[51]  To provide a data -driven benchmark for comparison with the proposed MCP -based models, we 

trained a Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM) neural network to predict streamflow using the same 

meteorological inputs as the MCP models. LSTM networks have demonstrated strong predictive 

performance in rainfall –runoff modeling and are widely used as benchmark models in hydrological 

machine -learning studies. 

[52]  The LSTM model uses daily precipitation P (mm day⁻¹) and potential evapotranspiration PET (mm 

day⁻¹) as inputs and predicts daily streamflow Q (mm day⁻¹). To capture temporal dependencies in 

hydrological processes, the model was trained using input sequences of varying length. Following the 

approach used in previous studies, four sequence lengths were considered: 300, 330, 365, and 390 days .

For each sequence length, the model was trained using 10 different random seeds , resulting in multiple 

realizations o f the network initialization. Among these runs, the model achieving the highest validation 

performance was selected for each catchment. Training was performed using the Adam optimizer with 

learning rates of 0.01 and 0.03 , a batch size of 64 , and a maximum of 2000 training epochs . The KGE metric 

was used as the loss function during training to ensure consistency with the calibration objective used for 

the MCP models. 

[53]  Consistent with the MCP training framework, local models were trained independently for each 

catchment rather than using a regional model across basins. The same data partitions used for the MCP 

models were applied for the LSTM benchmark: 1987 –2004 for training , 1980 –1987 for validation , and 

2004 –2014 for testing . A three -year spin -up period was also applied at the beginning of each simulation 

to reduce the influence of initial conditions. This benchmark configuration allows direct comparison 

between the proposed MCP -based models and a state -of -the -art recurrent neural network trained using 

the same inputs, evaluation metrics, and experimental setup. 

2.9 Evaluation Metrics 

[54]  Model performance was evaluated using the Kling –Gupta Efficiency (KGE) metric and its component 

statistics. KGE provides a comprehensive measure of hydrological model performance by simultaneously 

evaluating correlation, bias, and variability between simulated and observed streamflow. 

[55]  The KGE metric is defined as :

𝐾𝐺𝐸 = 1 − √(1 − 𝛼 )2 + (1 − 𝛽 )2 + (1 − 𝜌 )2 (Eq 30 )

𝛼 = 𝜎 𝑠 

> 𝜎 𝑜

(Eq 31 )𝛽 = 𝜇 𝑠 

> 𝜇 𝑜

(Eq 32 )

𝜌 = 𝐶𝑜 𝑣 𝑠𝑜 

> 𝜎 𝑠 𝜎 𝑜

(Eq 33 )

In these expressions:  𝜎 𝑠  and  𝜎 𝑜  are the standard deviations of the simulated and observed streamflow 

time series, respectively ; 𝜇 𝑠  and  𝜇 𝑜  are the corresponding means ; and  𝐶𝑜 𝑣 𝑠𝑜  denotes the covariance 

between simulated and observed streamflow . The three components of KGE represent distinct aspects of 

model performance: correlation ( 𝜌 ) measures agreement in timing and pattern, variability ratio ( 𝛼 )

evaluates whether simulated variability matches observations, and bias ratio ( 𝛽 ) indicates systematic 

over - or under -prediction of streamflow. KGE is maximized when all three components equal unity. 

[56]  In this study, we report the KGE skill score ( 𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  ), which provides a normalized version of KGE 

relative to a benchmark model, Following the formulation discussed by Knoben et al. (2019) :

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 = 1 − 1−𝐾𝐺𝐸  

> √2

(Eq 34 )

Using this formulation ensures that  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 ≤ 0 when the model performs no better than a trivial 

benchmark model corresponding to simulated values at every time step being set to the observed long -

term -mean , while a perfect model yields  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 = 1. All reported evaluation metrics are computed over 

the independent test period (2004 –2014) .

## 3 Results 

3.1 Overall Model Performance Across Catchments 

[57]  Test period p redictive performance of the different model configurations was evaluated across the 

15 study catchments using the  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  metric . Figure 7 summarizes the distribution s of  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values 

across basins for five model structures (M1 –M5) under four boundary -condition scenarios: standard 

without drainage (NP), ponding without drainage (PND), standard with drainage (NP_DR), and ponding 

with drainage (PND_DR). The dashed horizontal line indicates median performance of the LSTM 

benchmark model. Basin -by -basin performance across all configurations is shown in Figure S1 of the 

supplementary materials. 

[58]  Across all scenarios, model performance improved systematically as model structural complexity 

increased from M1 to M5 . The simplest configuration (M1) produced the lowest median skill and exhibited 

the largest inter -basin variability. Under the NP configuration, median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  increased from ~0.62 for 

M1 to ~0.77 for M5 (Table S1 in the supplementary materials ), indicating a substantial improvement in 

predictive skill as additional process representations were incorporated. A similar trend is observed for 

the PND scenario, where the median skill increases from ~0.62 to ~0.76 from M1 to M5. These results 

suggest that the progressive incorporati on of additional hydrological processes enables better 

representation of dominant runoff -generation mechanisms across diverse hydroclimatic regimes. 

[59]  The basin -level patterns shown in Figure S1 further highlight this structural improvement. Across 

most catchments, higher -order model structures (M4 –M5) consistently achieve higher  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values than 

simpler configurations (M1 –M2). This pattern indicates that the additional process representations 

embedded in the higher -order MCP structures improve the model’s ability to reproduce observed 

hydrological behavior across diverse hydroclimatic settings. However, in some basins the addition of 

further process complexity does not necessarily improve predictive performance, indica ting that 

dominant hydrological processes vary across catchments. 

[60]  Among the tested boundary -condition scenarios, inclusion of vertical drainage produced the most 

consistent improvements in predictive skill . Enabling drainage increased the median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  of the simplest model (M1) from ~0.62 to ~0.73 , representing a skill improvement of more than 0.10 . Drainage -enabled 

configurations also reduced the spread of performance across basins, indicating improved robustness 

across hydroclimatic conditions. The highest -performing MCP configuration, M5_NP_DR , achieved a 

median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  of ~0.77 across the study catchments. 

[61]  In contrast, the inclusion of ponding processes produced relatively modest changes in predictive 

skill. Differences between NP and PND configurations were generally small across model structures, 

suggesting that ponding processes may have a secondary influence on model performance compared with 

subsurface drainage processes in the studied catchments. 

[62]  As expected, t he data -based LSTM benchmark achieved the highest overall median skill , with a 

median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  of ~0.80 across basins. However, the best -performing MCP configurations approached this 

benchmark closely. For example, the M5_NP_DR configuration achieved a median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  only ~0.03 lower 

than the LSTM , indicating that physically -interpretable MCP -based models can achieve predictive 

performance comparable to state -of -the -art data -driven approaches while maintaining explicit 

representation of hydrological processes. 

[63]  Overall, these results demonstrate that both model structural complexity and the inclusion of 

subsurface drainage processes play important roles in improving predictive performance across diverse 

catchments. While the LSTM benchmark provides slightly higher median skill, the competitive 

performance of the MCP configurations highlights the potential of physically -interpretable models to 

bridge the gap between process -based and purely data -driven hydrological modeling approaches. 

Figure 7. Distribution of predictive performance across the 15 study catchments 

measured using the  𝑲𝑮 𝑬 𝒔𝒔 . Boxplots show the performance of five model structures (M1 –

M5) under four boundary -condition scenarios: standard without drainage (NP), ponding 

without drainage (PND), standard with drainage (NP_DR), and ponding with drainage 

(PND_DR). The dashed horizont al line represents the median performance of the LSTM 

benchmark model. Increasing model structural complexity generally improves predictive 

skill across basins, while the inclusion of vertical drainage processes leads to substantial performance gains. Ponding processes produce comparatively smaller changes in model 

performance .

Table 4. Basin -level comparison of predictive performance between the best -

performing MCP configuration and the LSTM benchmark across the 15 study 

catchments. For each basin, the MCP model configuration with the highest  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  is 

reported along with the corresponding LSTM performance. The table provides the 

numerical basis for the comparison shown in Figure 9 and illustrates that MCP models 

outperform the LSTM benchmark in 7 of the 15 catchments. 

Basin  Model  Best 

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 

LSTM 

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 

Arid Region (08324000)  M5_PND_DR  0.88  0.79 

Arid Region (09505800)  M4_PND_DR  0.79  0.83 

Arid Region (13161500)  M5_NP  0.70  0.77 

Historical Rainfall Dominated 

(02472000)  M4_PND  0.88  0.74 

Historical Rainfall Dominated 

(04122200)  M5_PND  0.80  0.91 

Historical Rainfall Dominated 

(04185000)  M5_DR  0.92  0.74 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (East) 

(01539000)  M5_PND  0.88  0.91 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (East) 

(01667500)  M5_PND_DR  0.85  0.81 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (East) 

(03173000)  M5_NP  0.71  0.76 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (West) 

(11451100)  M5_NP  0.91  0.86 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (West) 

(11473900)  M5_DR  0.88  0.80 

Recent Rainfall Dominated (West) 

(14222500)  M4_NP  0.80  0.93 

Snow Dominated (09035900)  M4_PND_DR  0.29  0.69 

Snow Dominated (09223000)  M1_DR  0.81  0.80 

Snow Dominated (12451000)  M5_PND_DR  0.71  0.76 3.2 Comparison with LSTM Benchmark 

[64]  To further evaluate predictive capability of the MCP framework relative to data -driven approaches, 

model performance was compared against the LSTM benchmark across all 15 study catchments. Figure 8 

presents a basin -level  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  comparison between the best -performing MCP configuration for each 

catchment and the LSTM model. Each point represents one catchment, and points above the 1:1 line 

indicate cases where the MCP model outperforms the LSTM benchmark. 

[65]  Overall, the best -performing MCP configurations achieved slightly higher predictive skill across the 

full set of catchments, with a median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 ~0.8 1, compared with ~0. 80 for the LSTM (Table S 4).

Moreover , the basin -level comparison reveals that MCP models achieved higher skill than the LSTM 

benchmark in 7 out of the 15 catchments (Figure 8; Table 4 ). These results demonstrate that physically -

interpretable MCP models can achieve performance comparable to state -of -the -art deep learning 

approaches in many hydroclimatic settings. 

[66]  The basin -specific comparison further highlights how relative performance of the two modeling 

approaches varies across hydroclimatic regimes. For example, in several rainfall -dominated basins, MCP 

configurations achieved higher skill than the LSTM benchmar k. In the Historical Rainfall Dominated basin 

(04185000) , the MCP configuration M5_DR achieved a  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 = 0.92 , substantially exceeding the LSTM 

performance of 0.74 . Similarly, in the Recent Rainfall Dominated (West) basin (11451100) , the MCP 

configuration M5_NP achieved a  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 = 0.91 , compared with 0.86 for the LSTM model. These results 

suggest that the physically -interpretable process representations embedded within the MCP framework 

can effectively capture dominant hydrological dynamics in rainfall -dominated environments. 

[67]  In contrast, the LSTM model exhibited stronger performance in some catchments, particularly in 

snow -dominated regions. For example, in the Snow Dominated basin (09035900) , the LSTM achieved a 

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 = 0.69 , whereas the best -performing MCP configuration achieved a substantially lower value ( only 

0.29 ). In the current MCP formulation, a single storage unit represents total water storage without 

explicitly distinguishing snowpack. However, snow -dominated systems are strongly controlled by 

accumulation and delayed release of snow water. Prior work (e.g., Wang et al., 2025 ) shows that 

representing these processes typically requires a dedicated snow storage (SWE) state. The absence of 

such a component likely limits MCP performance, whereas the LSTM can implicitly learn these dynamics. 

[68]  A distributional comparison of model skill further illustrates the differences between MCP 

configurations and the LSTM benchmark. Table S2 summarizes the percentile statistics of  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  across 

catchments for each model configuration. The LSTM model exhibits consistently better lower -percentile 

performance, with a 5th percentile  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 ~ 0.72 , whereas MCP configurations show worse minimum 

performance, with worst -case  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values ranging from ~0.16 to ~0.28 . This indicates that the LSTM 

model provides more consistent performance across catchments, particularly under challenging 

hydrological settings. 

[69]  However, the upper percentiles of the MCP configurations approach those of the LSTM model. For 

example, the 95th percentile  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  of the best MCP configurations reaches ~0.89 , c lose to 0.92 for the 

LSTM benchmark. This suggests that when the MCP framework successfully captures the dominant 

hydrological processes within a catchment, it can achieve predictive skill comparable to data -driven 

approaches. 

[70]  Overall, these results indicate that while the LSTM benchmark maintains slightly better and more 

consistent predictive performance across catchments , the MCP framework demonstrates competitive skill 

in many basins and in several cases exceeds the performance of the deep learning model . Importantly, the 

MCP framework achieves this performance while preserving physical interpretability and explicit representation of hydrological processes , providing a promising pathway toward bridging the gap between 

process -based and data -driven hydrological modeling. 

Figure 8. Comparison of predictive performance between the best -performing MCP 

configuration and the LSTM benchmark across the 15 study catchments. Each point 

represents one basin and is colored by hydroclimatic region. The dashed line indicates the 

1:1 relationship between MCP and LSTM performance. Points above the line represent 

basins where the MCP model outperforms the LSTM benchmark. MCP configu rations 

achieve higher  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values than LSTM in 7 of the 15 catchments , demonstrating the 

competitive performance of the physically -interpretable MCP framework relative to the 

deep learning benchmark .

3.3 Impact of Progressive Physical Augmentation (M1 → M5) 

[71]  To isolate the effect s of progressively -increasing model structural complexity, we quantified 

improvements in predictive skill relative to the baseline configuration (M1). Figure 9 summarizes the 

distribution of incremental performance gains (∆𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 ) for models M2 –M5 relative to M1 across the four 

boundary -condition scenarios (NP, PND, NP_DR, and PND_DR) , and Table S3 reports the values used in 

Figure 9 . Positive values indicate improved predictive performance compared with the baseline M1 

model. 

[72]  Across all scenarios, progressively augmenting the model structure resulted in systematic 

improvements in predictive skill. Under the standard configuration without drainage (NP), the median 

improvement increased from ~0.08 for M2 to ~0.09 for M4 (Table S3 ), while the most complex 

configuration (M5) produced a similar median improvement of ~0.08 relative to M1. Maximum 

improvements reached 0.30  ∆𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  in individual basins, indicating that structural augmentation can 

substantially enhance predictive performance in certain hydroclimatic settings . Similar patterns were observed for the ponding configuration (PND), where median improvements ranged from 0.08 –0.11 

(Table S3 ), with the largest gains again observed for M4 and M5. 

[73]  When vertical drainage processes were enabled, the magnitude of incremental improvements 

relative to M1 became smaller but remained consistently positive. Under the NP_DR scenario, median 

improvements ranged from 0.05 (M2) to 0.08 (M5) , and under PND_DR they ranged from 0.05 –0.08 (Table 

S3 ). The reduced magnitude of  ∆𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  under drainage -enabled configurations reflects the fact that the 

baseline model (M1) already benefits substantially from the inclusion of subsurface drainage processes, 

leaving less room for additional gains from structural augmentation. 

[74]  Basin -level responses to increasing model complexity are shown in Figure S2 , which illustrates the 

evolution of predictive performance across all 15 catchments as model structure progresses from M1 to 

M5. In most basins, the largest improvement occurs between M1 and M2 , indicating that the introduction 

of saturation -dependent horizontal drainage rate yields the largest marginal gain in predictive skill. 

Subsequent increases in complexity ( M3 –M5 ) generally produce smaller but still positive improvements, 

sug gesting diminishing returns as additional processes are incorporated. 

[75]  Overall, these results demonstrate that progressively augmenting the physical representation of 

hydrological processes leads to consistent improvements in predictive performance across diverse 

catchments. While the largest gains occur with the initial addi tion of key processes beyond the baseline 

model, higher -order configurations continue to provide incremental benefits, particularly in catchments 

where complex runoff -generation mechanisms are important 

Figure 9. Improvement in predictive skill relative to the baseline model (M1) measured 

as  ∆𝑲𝑮 𝑬 𝒔𝒔  across the 15 study catchments. Boxplots show the distribution of 

performance gains for models M2 –M5 relative to M1 under four boundary -condition 

scenarios (NP, PND, NP_DR, and PND_DR). Positive values indicate improved performance 

relative to the baseline configuration. 3.4 Influence of Boundary Conditions (NP, PND, DR, PND –DR) 

[76]  To evaluate how external boundary conditions influence predictive performance, we compared 

model skill under four configurations: no ponding and no drainage (NP), ponding without drainage (PND), 

drainage without ponding (NP_DR), and combined ponding and dr ainage (PND_DR). Figure 10 shows the 

regional median response of  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  to increasing model complexity under these boundary -condition 

scenarios for representative hydroclimatic regimes, while Table 5 summarizes the regional median 

differences between configurations. Additional results for the best -performing model structure in each 

region are provided in Table S 4 in the supplement ary materials .

[77]  Arid Region: The effect of boundary conditions is strongly region dependent. In the arid region 

(Figure 10 b), activating vertical drainage substantially improves predictive performance across the model 

hierarchy. Averaged across model structures, drainage increases regional median  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  by ~0.17 for the 

NP configuration and ~0.15 for the PND configuration ( Table 5). Although increasing structural complexity 

within the no -drainage family still improves skill, the dominant shift in performance occurs when drainage 

is enabled . This result suggests that allowing water to leave the modeled soil column is essential in arid 

systems, where deep percolation and delayed subsurface losses are important components of the 

catchment water balance. For the best -performing structure in thi s region (M4), adding drainage increases 

performance by ~0.06 under NP and ~0.07 under PND ( Table S 4), whereas ponding alone has only a small 

effect. 

[78]  Snow -Dominated Region: A similarly strong influence of drainage is observed in the snow -dominated 

region (Figure 10c ). Averaged across model structures, activating drainage increases regional median 

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  by ~0.38 for both NP and PND configurations ( Table 5), far exceeding the effect of ponding alone. 

For the best -performing structure in this region ( M5 ), drainage improves performance by ~0.41 under NP 

and ~0.42 under PND ( Table S 4). These large gains indicate that the lower boundary condition exerts a 

dominant control on model performance in snow -influenced basins. In these systems, drainage likely 

represents delayed release pathways and subsurface storage processes that become important during 

snow accumulation and melt periods. 

[79]  Rainfall -Dominated Region s: In contrast, the role of drainage is markedly different in rainfall -

dominated regions (Figure 10a ). In both the historical rainfall -dominated and recent rainfall -dominated 

regimes, enabling drainage generally reduces model performance. Across model structures, the mean 

effect of drainage ranges from approximately −0.05 in the historical rainfall -dominated region to 

approximately −0.08 in both recent rainfall -dominated regions . For the best -performing structures, 

drainage reduces performance by ~0.02 in the historical rainfall -dominated region , 0.10 –0.12 in the recent 

rainfall -dominated East region , and 0.08 in the recent rainfall -dominated West region . These results 

indicate that free drainage removes too much water from the active storage in humid rainfall -dominated 

systems , thereby weakening the model’s ability to sustain runoff generation and reproduce observed 

streamflow dynamics. 

[80]  Across all hydroclimatic regimes, the effect of ponding is consistently smaller than the effect of 

drainage.  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  differences between the NP and PND configurations are typically 0.001 –0.01 (Table 5). 

Even in regions where ponding produces modest improvements, the magnitude of the effect remains 

much smaller than that of drainage, indicating that surface storage processes play a secondary role relative 

to the lower boundary condition .

[81]  Taken together, these results demonstrate that the influence of boundary conditions is strongly 

hydroclimate dependent . Vertical drainage substantially improves performance in arid and snow -

dominated regions , but generally degrades performance in rainfall -dominated basins . Ponding produces comparatively modest changes across all regimes. These findings suggest that there is no universally 

optimal boundary condition for all catchments , and that appropriate representations of surface and 

subsurface boundary processes should be selected based on regional hydrological characteristics. 

[82]  These results highlight the importance of representing physically appropriate boundary processes 

within process -aware machine learning models, as incorrect boundary assumptions can substantially 

degrade predictive performance even when internal model structure is improved. 

Figure 1 0. Regional median predictive performance ( 𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  ) as a function of model 

structural complexity (M1 –M5) under four boundary -condition scenarios: no ponding 

and no drainage (NP), ponding without drainage (PND), drainage without ponding 

(NP_DR), and combined ponding and drainage (PND_DR). Panels show representative 

hydroclimatic regimes, illustrating how the influence of boundary conditions varies across 

climatic settings. In arid and snow -dominated regions, enabling vertical drainage 

substantially improves predictive skill, whereas in rain fall -dominated regions 

configurations without drainage generally perform better. Thin lines indicate individual 

basin responses and bold lines denote regional medians. 

Table 5. Regional median differences in predictive performance ( 𝑲𝑮 𝑬 𝒔𝒔 ) between 

boundary -condition configurations averaged across model structures (M1 –M5). 

Positive values indicate improved performance when the first configuration is used. The 

results highlight the dominant influence of vertical drainage relative to surface ponding 

across hydroclimatic regimes. 

Region  NP_DR − 

NP 

PND_DR −

PND 

PND − 

NP 

PND_DR − 

NP_DR 

Ponding 

effect 

Drainage 

effect 

Arid Region  0.17  0.15  0.004  0.004  0.004  0.16 

Historical Rainfall 

Dominated  −0.048  −0.051  0.01  -0.0004  0.01  -0.05 

Recent Rainfall Dominated 

(East)  −0.080  −0.081  0.001  0.004  0.001  -0.08 Recent Rainfall Dominated 

(West)  −0.079  −0.080  0.0003  0.0004  0.0003  -0.08 

Snow Dominated  0.38  0.38  0.01  0.0007  0.01  0.38 

3.5 Flow Regime Performance 

[83]  To better understand how model performance varies across the discharge spectrum, we evaluated 

predictive skill separately for low -, mid -, and high -flow regimes . Flow regimes were defined using 

exceedance probabilities , and model performance was assessed using both  𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐸  and  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  . Figure 11

summarizes the distribution of errors and skill scores across flow regimes for the best -performing MCP 

configurations alongside the LSTM benchmark, while Figure 12 presents representative flow duration 

curves (FDCs) for selected basins across different hydroclimatic regions. 

[84]  Across all models, error magnitude increases from low to high flows, reflecting the larger variability 

associated with peak discharge events. In the low -flow regime , the baseline configuration (M1) exhibits 

substantially larger RMSE and strongly negative  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values, indicating poor reproduction of observed 

low -flow dynamics. Incorporating additional hydrological processes in the augmented MCP structures 

(M2 –M5) substantially reduces RMSE and improves  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 , demonstrating that these configurations 

better capture slow storage dynamics and subsurface flow processes that control baseflow conditions .

Despite these improvements, the LSTM benchmark generally achieves the lowest RMSE and highest 

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  in this regime, suggesting that the data -driven model more effectively reproduces the persistence 

and variability of low flows. 

[85]  In the mid -flow regime , both RMSE and  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  indicate improved performance relative to the 

baseline model. The difference between MCP configurations becomes smaller, with M2 –M5 exhibiting 

broadly comparable error and skill distributions. This pattern suggests that once key hydrological 

processes are incorporated, additional increases in model complexity yield only modest improvements in 

predictive performance .

[86]  In the high -flow regime , RMSE values increase for all models due to the larger magnitude and 

episodic nature of high -flow events. However,  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values remain positive across models, indicating 

that the general timing and variability of peak flows are reasonably captured. Differences between MCP 

configurations are relatively small in this regime, although the LSTM model tends to maintain slightly 

higher skill scores across basins. 

[87]  To further evaluate model behavior across the full flow distribution, Figure 1 2 presents flow 

duration curves for representative basins spanning arid, snow -dominated, and rainfall -dominated 

hydroclimatic regimes. These plots illustrate how well the models reproduce observed streamflow 

distributions across the entire range of exceedance probabilities. 

[88]  In the arid basin (Figure 1 2a), the best -performing MCP configuration closely follows the observed 

flow distribution across much of the exceedance spectrum but underestimates very low flows, resulting 

in a sharper drop in the tail of the FDC. The LSTM model captures low -flow persistence more effectively 

in this basin. 

[89]  In the snow -dominated basin (Figure 1 2b), the MCP model captures the overall slope of the 

observed FDC reasonably well but tends to overestimate moderate flows and underestimate extreme 

flows. The LSTM model again better reproduces the lower tail of the distribution. In the rainfall -dominated 

basins (Figures 1 2c–12e), both models reproduce the general shape of the FDC, although differences 

appear at both high - and low -exceedance probabilities. In several cases, the MCP configuration better captures intermediate flows, whereas the LSTM model more accurately reproduces the persistence of low 

flows. 

[90]  Overall, the flow -regime analysis indicates that the largest improvements associated with 

progressive model augmentation occur in the low -flow regime , where additional physical process 

representations substantially reduce prediction errors relative to the baseline model. Differences 

between model structures become smaller in the mid - and high -flow regimes , suggesting diminishing 

returns from additional complexity once key runoff -generation mechanisms are represented. While the 

LSTM benchmark generally provi des the most accurate representation of the full flow distribution ,

particularly for low -flow persistence, the MCP models capture many aspects of observed flow dynamics 

with comparable accuracy across moderate and high flows. 

Figure 1 1. Flow -regime performance across models. Top row: RMSE distributions for low, 

mid -, and high -flow regimes. Bottom row: corresponding  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  distributions. Figure 1 2. Flow duration curves for representative basins across hydroclimatic regimes 

comparing observed streamflow, the best -performing MCP configuration, and the LSTM 

benchmark. 

3.6 Event -Scale Dynamics and Hydrograph Behavior 

[91]  Hydrograph comparisons provide additional insight into the temporal dynamics of simulated 

streamflow and help interpret the statistical performance metrics. While the flow -regime analysis ( Figure 

11 ) summarizes model skill across low -, mid -, and high -flow conditions and the flow duration curves 

(Figure 12 ) describe the distribution of simulated flows across exceedance probabilities, hydrographs 

provide a time -resolved perspective of how model differences emerge during individual runoff events. 

Figure 13 illustrates representative hydrographs for five basins spanning the major hydroclimatic regimes 

consider ed in this study, including arid, snow -dominated, rainfall -dominated (West), rainfall -dominated 

(East), and historically rainfall -dominated systems. For each basin, three hydrological years representing 

dry, moderate, and wet conditions are shown. 

[92]  Across most basins, both the MCP models and the LSTM benchmark reproduce the general timing 

of major runoff events , indicating that both modeling approaches capture the dominant temporal 

variability of streamflow. Differences between the models primarily appear in the representation of peak 

magnitude, recession behavior, and low -flow conditions .

[93]  In the arid basin , runoff events are episodic and driven by a small number of high -intensity 

precipitation events. Both models reproduce the timing of major runoff pulses with little delay relative to 

the observations. However, the LSTM model tends to generate sharper and more abrupt peak responses ,

particularly during wet years, whereas the MCP simulations produce smoother peaks and more gradual 

recessions . This smoother behavior reflects the influence of storage and drainage processes represented 

within the MCP framework, which distribute runoff generation over longer time scales. 

[94]  In the snow -dominated basin , streamflow exhibits a gradual seasonal rise associated with snow 

accumulation and subsequent melt. Both models capture the timing of the primary snowmelt peak ,

although differences occur in the magnitude of the peak and the representation of early -season baseflow 

conditions. The MCP simulations show smoother seasonal transitions, whereas the LSTM model 

sometimes produces more pronounced peak responses during the main melt period .[95]  In the rainfall -dominated basins , hydrographs are characterized by rapid runoff responses following 

precipitation events. Both MCP and LSTM models generally reproduce the timing of individual rainfall -

driven peaks , demonstrating that the models successfully capture event -scale hydrological variability. 

Differences between the models appear mainly in peak magnitude and hydrograph shape. In some events 

the LSTM model produces sharper peaks, whereas in other cases the MCP simulations generate slightly 

higher p eak flows with smoother recessions. The MCP hydrographs also tend to maintain more gradual 

recession limbs , reflecting the influence of storage and drainage processes within the mass -conserving 

framework. 

[96]  The comparison across dry, moderate, and wet years further demonstrates that both modeling 

approaches maintain consistent timing of major events across a wide range of hydrological conditions. 

Although deviations between simulated and observed flows increase during extreme wet -year events —

when peak magnit udes become more difficult to reproduce — the overall hydrograph structure and event 

timing remain well represented by both models across the examined hydroclimatic regimes. 

[97]  Overall, the hydrograph analysis indicates that while the LSTM benchmark often produces sharper 

event responses , the MCP models capture the timing and temporal evolution of runoff events in a 

physically consistent manner . The smoother hydrograph behavior produced by the MCP framework 

reflects the explicit representation of storage dynamics, drainage processes, and mass conservation ,

which regulate the release of water during and after runoff events. These results demonstrate that the 

MCP models reproduce ke y features of event -scale hydrological behavior across diverse hydroclimatic 

regimes while maintaining physically -interpretable process representations. Figure 1 3. Representative hydrograph comparisons between observed streamflow, the 

best -performing MCP configuration, and the LSTM benchmark for five basins 

representing major hydroclimatic regimes: (a) arid region (USGS 08324000), (b) snow -

dominated region (USGS 09223000), (c) recent rainfall -dominated region (West) (USGS 

11451100), (d) recent rainfall -dominated region (East) (USGS 01539000), and (e) historical rainfall -dominated region (USGS 04185000).For each basin, three hydrological years are 

shown to illustrate model behavior under contrasting hydrological conditions. Left panels 

correspond to a relatively dry year, middle panels correspond to a year with moderate 

hydrological conditions, and right panels correspond to a wet year characterized by 

larger runoff events. Observed streamflow is shown as red points, the best -performing 

MCP configuration for each basin is shown as a solid blue line, and the LSTM be nchmark is 

shown as a dashed black line. 

## 4 Discussion 

4.1 Model Structural Complexity and Process Representation 

[98]  A key result of this study is that improvements in predictive skill arise primarily from embedding 

physically meaningful process constraints, rather than increasing model complexity alone. The largest 

performance gains occur when moving from the baseline configuration (M1) to early augmente d models 

(M2 –M3), indicating that a simple mass -conserving storage unit does not adequately represent dominant 

rainfall –runoff dynamics .

[99]  Subsequent increases in structural complexity (M4 –M5) generally yield smaller incremental 

improvements, suggesting diminishing returns once key storage –release mechanisms are represented. In 

some catchments, intermediate model structures perform comparably to, or better than, more complex 

variants, reinforcing the principle that model structure should reflect dominant processes rather than 

maximize complexity. Within the MCP framework, this progression is particularly informative because 

each structural add ition corresponds to a specific, interpretable process hypothesis . As a result, 

performance differences across M1 –M5 provide insight into which hydrological mechanisms most 

strongly control runoff behavior, rather than reflecting purely architectural changes. 

[100]  Overall, these findings suggest that hybrid physics –AI models benefit most from targeted 

incorporation of dominant process representations , especially those governing storage and release 

dynamics, while additional complexity plays a secondary role 

4.2 Comparison Between Process -Based MCP and LSTM Models 

[101]  The comparison with the LSTM benchmark highlights a fundamental trade -off between predictive 

flexibility and physical interpretability . While LSTM models achieve more consistent performance across 

catchments, the MCP framework demonstrates that strong physical constraints do not preclude 

competitive predictive skill .

[102]  The variability in MCP performance across basins suggests that its effectiveness depends on how 

well the embedded process representations align with dominant hydrological controls. In catchments 

where key processes are adequately represented, MCP models ca n match or exceed LSTM performance. 

In contrast, performance degrades when important mechanisms —such as snow storage and delayed 

melt —are not explicitly represented. This highlights a key distinction: MCP performance is process -limited, 

whereas LSTM perfor mance is data -limited but structurally unconstrained .

[103]  The Supporting Information ( Figures S3 –S4 ) further indicates that MCP structural augmentation 

primarily improves the dynamics of runoff response (e.g., correlation and variability), rather than 

systematically correcting bias. This suggests that adding physical structure enhances how the model 

represents storage –release behavior but does not automatically resolve all sources of model error .

[104]  Beyond predictive performance, the two approaches differ fundamentally in interpretability. MCP 

internal states and fluxes correspond to physically meaningful quantities, enabling direct diagnosis of model behavior in terms of hydrological processes. In contrast, LSTM representations remain latent, 

limiting the ability to attribute prediction errors to specific mechanisms. 

[105]  Taken together, these results suggest that MCP and LSTM models represent complementary 

modeling paradigms. LSTM models provide strong predictive robustness, while MCP models offer process 

transparency and mechanistic interpretability. The ability of MCP co nfigurations to approach LSTM 

performance in many basins indicates that process -aware machine learning can bridge the gap between 

physically based and purely data -driven hydrological modeling. 

4.3 Hydroclimatic and Event -Scale Controls on Model Performance 

[106]  Model performance is strongly controlled by hydroclimatic regime, indicating that the 

effectiveness of both structural augmentation and boundary -condition assumptions depends on 

dominant catchment processes. Rather than providing uniform improvements, the same model 

configuration can be beneficial in some regions and detrimental in others .

[107]  A key result is the contrasting role of vertical drainage across climates . In arid and snow -

dominated basins , enabling drainage consistently improves performance, suggesting that allowing water 

to leave the modeled storage is necessary to represent subsurface losses and delayed release pathways. 

In contrast, rainfall -dominated basins show the opposite behavior: drainage generally reduces 

performance, indicating that retaining water within the active storage better reflects runoff generation in 

humid enviro nments. Compared to drainage, the effect of ponding is consistently minor, suggesting that 

lower -boundary conditions exert the dominant control on model behavior .

[108]  These regime -dependent differences are also reflected in event -scale dynamics. Across basins, 

both MCP and LSTM models reproduce the timing of major runoff events, indicating that the dominant 

temporal variability of streamflow is well captured. However, s ystematic differences emerge in 

hydrograph shape. The LSTM tends to generate sharper peaks and more abrupt responses, whereas MCP 

simulations are generally smoother, with more gradual rises and recessions .

[109]  This contrast highlights a fundamental difference in how the two models represent runoff 

generation. The smoother MCP hydrographs are consistent with a storage -controlled response, where 

water release is regulated by internal state and mass -conserving flux es. In contrast, the sharper LSTM 

responses reflect its ability to reproduce rapid changes in discharge without explicit constraints on storage 

dynamics. 

[110]  The interaction between hydroclimate and event -scale behavior provides additional insight. In 

arid systems , MCP models capture the timing of episodic runoff events but tend to dampen peak 

magnitudes, consistent with their stronger storage control. In snow -dominated basins , the absence of an 

explicit snow storage leads to overly smooth seasonal transitions, limiting the model’s ability to represent 

delayed melt -driven peaks. In rainfall -dominated systems , both models capture event timing well, but 

difference s in recession behavior and low -flow persistence become more pronounced. 

[111]  Taken together, these results suggest that MCP performance is primarily limited by how well the 

embedded process representations capture storage persistence and release dynamics across wetness 

conditions. While the current formulation successfully reproduc es many aspects of event -scale behavior, 

improving the representation of rapid runoff responses and prolonged low -flow persistence —particularly 

in snow -influenced and humid systems —remains an important direction for future development. 

4.4 Process Interpretation Through Gate Response Functions 

[112]  An important advantage of the MCP framework is that the learned internal flux controls can be 

examined directly in physical terms. In particular, the subsurface gate response functions describe how water release from the modeled storage unit varies as soil saturation increases. Instead of relying on a 

constant drainage coefficient or an uninterpretable latent state, the MCP framework learns a nonlinear 

mapping between internal saturation state and su bsurface outflow activation. This provides a transparent 

representation of how the model regulates storage release across different wetness conditions. 

[113]  The learned gate -response curves show strong nonlinearity and substantial variation across 

model structures and boundary -condition scenarios ( Figure 14 ). In most cases, subsurface gate activation 

is low under dry conditions and increases with increasing saturation, although the timing and steepness 

of this increase vary across configurations. Some curves remain near zero until relatively high saturation 

levels are reached and then increase rapidly, while others show a more gradual increase across a broader 

range of saturation values. This variation indicates that the MCP framework learns different state -

dependent release behaviors across basins and structural configurations .

[114]  This behavior is hydrologically meaningful . In classical soil physics, unsaturated and saturated 

conductivity are strongly nonlinear functions of pressure head or degree of saturation. Hydraulic 

conductivity typically remains small at low moisture content and increases rapidly as the soil approach es 

saturation. The learned MCP gate functions play an analogous role: they define an effective drainage 

response that varies with internal storage state. Although the MCP gate is not intended to reproduce a 

full Ri chards -equation constitutive relationship, it captures the same essential idea that water release 

should depend nonlinearly on wetness. In this sense, the gate can be interpreted as a learned effective 

conductivity function embedded within a mass -conservin g neural architecture. 

[115]  Figure 14 also shows that boundary -condition assumptions influence the learned gate shapes. In 

many basins, enabling vertical drainage shifts the response toward earlier or stronger activation across 

the saturation range. This indicates that the model adjusts its in ternal storage –release relationship when 

an additional lower -boundary outflow pathway is available. The ponding representation also alters the 

curvature of some responses, suggesting interactions between upper -boundary infiltration regulation and 

subsurface drainage behavior within the learned storage dynamics. 

[116]  Differences across model structures are equally informative. Lower -order models tend to exhibit 

simpler and more monotonic gate responses, whereas higher -order models often show richer and more 

gradual transitions across saturation states . This suggests that the progressive physical augmentation 

from M3 to M5 does not simply improve predictive skill numerically; it also changes the character of the 

learned storage –release relationship . As additional process realism is embedded in the unit, the gate 

response becomes capable of representing more nuanced transitions between dry, transitional, and wet 

states. This is consistent with the broader interpretation that higher -order MCP variants provide a more 

realistic internal hydrological response rather than merel y increasing model flexibility. 

[117]  An important implication of these results is that the MCP framework offers a physically -

interpretable alternative to dynamic parameter approaches commonly used in differentiable hydrology 

and hybrid ML models. In some data -driven frameworks, time -varying parameters are generated by 

neural networks but do not correspond to identifiable physical quantities. By contrast, the MCP gate 

remains tied to an explicit hydrological control variable —soil saturation —and represents a functional 

process relationship rathe r than an arbitrary latent adjustment. This makes it possible to interpret how 

the model is generating runoff, not just whether it predicts streamflow accurately. 

[118]  More broadly, the gate -response curves demonstrate that interpretability in hybrid hydrological 

models can extend beyond mass conservation or state labeling. The model can learn constitutive -style 

relationships that resemble familiar hydrological functions while remaining fully differentiable and 

trainable from data. This is one of the most promising aspects of the MCP framework: it allows process 

hypotheses to be encoded, tested, and interpreted within a machine -learning setting . The learned gate functions therefore provide not only a useful diagnostic of model behavior, but also a pathway toward 

more physically grounded and scientifically informative AI -based hydrological models. 

Figure 1 4. Learned subsurface gate response functions showing the relationship 

between soil saturation and subsurface gate activation for MCP model configurations 

under different boundary -condition scenarios. Thin lines represent individual catchment 

responses, while thick lines represent regional median behavior. Solid lines denote 

configurations without vertical drainage and dashed lines denote drainage -enabled 

configurations. Colors indicate model structure s and ponding scenarios. The curves 

illustrate how the MCP framework learns nonlinear, state -dependent storage –release 

relationships that vary across model structures and boundary -condition assumptions. 

4.5 Limitations and Future Work 

[119]  While the results demonstrate the potential of the MCP framework as an interpretable hybrid 

hydrological model, several limitations of the present study should be acknowledged. 

[120]  First, the experiments were conducted using a relatively small set of catchments spanning five 

hydroclimatic regimes. Although the selected basins provide diversity in climate and hydrological 

behavior, the total sample size remains limited compared with l arge -sample hydrological studies based 

on datasets such as CAMELS -US dataset. Evaluating the MCP framework across a larger number of basins 

would provide a more comprehensive assessment of its robustness and help determine whether the 

regional process patt erns identified here hold across broader hydroclimatic gradients. 

[121]  Second, the current formulation focuses on a single effective soil storage unit and does not 

explicitly represent several hydrological processes that can influence catchment -scale runoff dynamics. In 

particular, the framework does not include explicit representations of snow accumulation and melt 

processes, deeper groundwater storage, or channel routing . These simplifications may contribute to some 

of the performance differences observed across hydroclimatic regimes, particularly in snow -dominated 

basins and in cases where low -flow persistence is difficult to reproduce. Incorporating additional storage components or process representations could help address these limitations in future model 

developments. 

[122]  Third, the boundary -condition representations used in this study are intentionally simplified. 

Surface ponding is represented as a lumped temporary storage layer, and vertical drainage is 

implemented as a free lower -boundary flux leaving the modeled soil c olumn. These simplified 

formulations are useful for isolating the influence of boundary conditions within the MCP framework, but 

they do not capture the full complexity of surface runoff routing or groundwater recharge processes. 

Future work could explore more physically detailed boundary representations, including lateral 

subsurface flow pathways or groundwater exchange dynamics. 

[123]  Another limitation concerns the spatial representation of hydrological processes. In the current 

implementation, the MCP framework operates at the catchment scale with a single storage unit 

representing an effective soil column. While this design simplifie s interpretation and facilitates controlled 

testing of internal process hypotheses, real catchments exhibit substantial spatial heterogeneity in soils, 

topography, vegetation, and runoff -generation mechanisms. Extending the MCP architecture to include 

mult iple interacting storage units or spatially distributed components may allow the framework to better 

represent this heterogeneity. 

[124]  Finally, the present study focuses on local models trained independently for each catchment. 

While this approach simplifies the interpretation of learned process relationships, it does not exploit 

potential information sharing across basins. Future researc h could investigate regional MCP formulations 

that incorporate catchment attributes or other forms of cross -basin learning to improve transferability 

while maintaining the physical interpretability of the internal storage –flux structure. 

[125]  Despite these limitations, the results demonstrate that embedding physically -interpretable 

process representations within a mass -conserving neural architecture is a promising direction for hybrid 

hydrological modeling. By combining machine -learning flexibility with explicit conservation constraints 

and interpretable internal dynamics, the MCP f ramework provides a pathway toward models that support 

both predictive performance and scientific insight into hydrological processes. 

## 5 Conclusion s

[126]  This study investigated whether progressively embedding physically meaningful hydrological 

processes within a single Mass -Conserving Perceptron (MCP) storage unit can improve predictive 

performance and interpretability in rainfall –runoff modeling. By reformulating the MCP unit as a process -

aware soil column and sequentially introducing bounded storage, state -dependent conductivity, 

infiltration controls, ponding storage , vertical drainage, and nonlinear water -table dynamics, we 

developed a hierarchy of phys ically -interpretable model structures. These models were evaluated across 

15 catchments spanning five major hydroclimatic regimes of the continental United States and compared 

with a Long Short -Term Memory (LSTM) benchmark. 

[127]  The results show that progressively augmenting the internal physical structure of the MCP unit 

generally improves predictive performance. The largest improvements occur when key storage and 

drainage processes are introduced beyond the baseline configuratio n, while additional structural 

complexity yields smaller incremental gains. This pattern suggests that performance improvements arise 

primarily from incorporating the dominant hydrological mechanisms controlling storage –release behavior 

rather than from in creasing model complexity alone. 

[128]  Boundary -condition assumptions were found to exert a strong and regionally dependent 

influence on model performance. Vertical drainage substantially improves predictive skill in arid and 

snow -dominated regions, indicating the importance of deep percolation and delayed subsurface storage dynamics in these environments. In contrast, enabling free drainage generally reduces performance in 

rainfall -dominated catchments, where retaining water within the active storage better reproduces 

observed runoff generation. Surface ponding produces compa ratively small effects across regions. These 

results demonstrate that the representation of boundary processes must be aligned with hydroclimatic 

context rather than applied uniformly across basins. 

[129]  Comparison with the LSTM benchmark shows that the best -performing MCP configurations 

approach the predictive skill of state -of -the -art deep learning models while maintaining explicit physical 

interpretability. Although the LSTM achieves slightly higher and more consistent performance across 

catchments, MCP models outperform the LSTM in several basins and reproduce many aspects of observed 

streamflow dynamics with comparable accuracy. Importantly, the MCP framework provides direct access 

to internal storage states and flux relationships, enabling mechanistic interpretation that is not possible 

with purely data -driven models. 

[130]  Analysis of the learned gate response functions further demonstrates that the MCP framework 

can learn physically meaningful relationships between storage state and subsurface water release. These 

nonlinear response curves resemble effective conductivity -ty pe behaviors observed in soil hydrology and 

illustrate how interpretable process relationships can emerge within a differentiable machine -learning 

architecture. This capability highlights the potential of MCP -based models to serve not only as predictive 

to ols but also as platforms for testing hydrological process hypotheses. 

[131]  Overall, the results suggest that hybrid physics –AI frameworks that embed physically -

interpretable process structures within machine -learning architectures can achieve competitive 

predictive performance while retaining scientific transparency. Rather than treating machine learning and 

process -based modeling as competing paradigms, the MCP framework dem onstrates a pathway for 

integrating the strengths of both approaches. Aligning model complexity with dominant hydrological 

processes and hydroclimatic context may therefore provide a promising strategy for developing next -

generation hydrological models that support both accurate prediction and improved understanding of 

catchment dynamics. By embedding physically meaningful process representations directly within 

differentiable computational units, the MCP framework offers a promising foundation for interpretable 

and process -aware machine learning in hydrology. 

[132]  As always, we solicit and encourage construc tive comments and debate on these and related 

aspects of geoscien ti fic model development in the service of advancing scien ti fic knowledge. 

Open Research 

The data used in this study are freely available online: 

Acknowledgments 

Funding for this project was provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 

awarded to the Cooperative Institute for Research on Hydrology (CIROH) through the NOAA Cooperative 

Agreement with The University of Alabama, NA22NWS432000 3. This research was supported in part by 

an appointment to the Department of Defense (DOD) Research Participation Program administered by 

the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) through an interagency agreement between the 

U.S. Departmen t of Energy (DOE) and the DOD. ORISE is managed by ORAU under DOE contract number 

DE -SC0014664. All opinions expressed in this paper are the author's and do not necessarily reflect the 

policies and views of DOD, DOE, or ORAU/ORISE .Reference s

Addor, N. and Melsen, L. A.: Legacy, Rather Than Adequacy, Drives the Selection of Hydrological Models, 

Water Resources Research, 55, 378 -390, 10.1029/2018wr022958, 2019. 

Addor, N., Newman, A. J., Mizukami, N., and Clark, M. P.: The CAMELS data set: catchment attributes and 

meteorology for large -sample studies, Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 21, 5293 -5313, 

10.5194/hess -21 -5293 -2017, 2017. 

Agnihotri, J., Behrangi, A., Tavakoly, A., Geheran, M., Farmani, M. A., and Niu, G. Y.: Higher Frozen Soil 

Permeability Represented in a Hydrological Model Improves Spring Streamflow Prediction From River 

Basin to Continental Scales, Water Resources Resear ch, 59, 10.1029/2022wr033075, 2023. 

Bergström, S.: The HBV model, 1995. 

Beven, K.: A manifesto for the equifinality thesis, Journal of Hydrology, 320, 18 -36, 

10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.07.007, 2006. 

Beven, K.: Deep learning, hydrological processes and the uniqueness of place, Hydrological Processes, 34, 

3608 -3613, 10.1002/hyp.13805, 2020. 

Burnash, R. J.: A generalized streamflow simulation system: Conceptual modeling for digital computers, 

US Department of Commerce, National Weather Service, and State of California …1973. 

Clark, M. P., Nijssen, B., Lundquist, J. D., Kavetski, D., Rupp, D. E., Woods, R. A., Freer, J. E., Gutmann, E. 

D., Wood, A. W., Brekke, L. D., Arnold, J. R., Gochis, D. J., and Rasmussen, R. M.: A unified approach for 

process‐based hydrologic modeling: 1. Modeling concept, Water Resources Research, 51, 2498 -2514, 

10.1002/2015wr017198, 2015a. 

Clark, M. P., Nijssen, B., Lundquist, J. D., Kavetski, D., Rupp, D. E., Woods, R. A., Freer, J. E., Gutmann, E. 

D., Wood, A. W., Gochis, D. J., Rasmussen, R. M., Tarboton, D. G., Mahat, V., Flerchinger, G. N., and Marks, 

D. G.: A unified approach for proce ss‐based hydrologic modeling: 2. Model implementation and case 

studies, Water Resources Research, 51, 2515 -2542, 10.1002/2015wr017200, 2015b. 

Farmani, M. A., Behrangi, A., Gupta, A., Tavakoly, A., Geheran, M., and Niu, G. -Y.: Do land models miss key 

soil hydrological processes controlling soil moisture memory?, Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 29, 

547 -566, 10.5194/hess -29 -547 -2025, 2025. 

Farmani, M. A., Tavakoly, A. A., Behrangi, A., Qiu, Y., Gupta, A., Jawad, M., Sohi, H. Y., Zhang, X. -Y., 

Geheran, M. P., and Niu, G.: Improving Streamflow Predictions in the Arid Southwestern United States 

Through Understanding of Baseflow Generation Mecha nisms, 10.22541/essoar.173272456.69006273/v1, 

2024. 

Feng, D., Fang, K., and Shen, C.: Enhancing Streamflow Forecast and Extracting Insights Using Long‐Short 

Term Memory Networks With Data Integration at Continental Scales, Water Resources Research, 56, 

10.1029/2019wr026793, 2020. 

Feng, D., Liu, J., Lawson, K., and Shen, C.: Differentiable, Learnable, Regionalized Process‐Based Models 

With Multiphysical Outputs can Approach State‐Of‐The‐Art Hydrologic Prediction Accuracy, Water 

Resources Research, 58, 10.1029/2022wr032404, 2022. 

Gupta, H. V., Sorooshian, S., and Yapo, P. O.: Toward improved calibration of hydrologic models: Multiple 

and noncommensurable measures of information, Water Resources Research, 34, 751 -763, 

10.1029/97wr03495, 1998. Gupta, H. V., Kling, H., Yilmaz, K. K., and Martinez, G. F.: Decomposition of the mean squared error and 

NSE performance criteria: Implications for improving hydrological modelling, Journal of Hydrology, 377, 

80 -91, 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2009.08.003, 2009. 

Jia, X., Willard, J., Karpatne, A., Read, J. S., Zwart, J. A., Steinbach, M., and Kumar, V.: Physics -Guided 

Machine Learning for Scientific Discovery: An Application in Simulating Lake Temperature Profiles, 

ACM/IMS Transactions on Data Science, 2, 1 -26, 10 .1145/3447814, 2021. 

Karpatne, A., Atluri, G., Faghmous, J. H., Steinbach, M., Banerjee, A., Ganguly, A., Shekhar, S., Samatova, 

N., and Kumar, V.: Theory -Guided Data Science: A New Paradigm for Scientific Discovery from Data, IEEE 

Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineerin g, 29, 2318 -2331, 10.1109/tkde.2017.2720168, 2017. 

Kirchner, J. W.: Getting the right answers for the right reasons: Linking measurements, analyses, and 

models to advance the science of hydrology, Water Resources Research, 42, 10.1029/2005wr004362, 

2006. 

Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Brenner, C., Schulz, K., and Herrnegger, M.: Rainfall –runoff modelling using Long 

Short -Term Memory (LSTM) networks, Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 22, 6005 -6022, 

10.5194/hess -22 -6005 -2018, 2018. 

Kratzert, F., Klotz, D., Herrnegger, M., Sampson, A. K., Hochreiter, S., and Nearing, G. S.: Toward Improved 

Predictions in Ungauged Basins: Exploiting the Power of Machine Learning, Water Resources Research, 

55, 11344 -11354, 10.1029/2019wr026065, 2019. 

Moghisi, S. S., Yazdi, J., and Salehi Neyshabouri, S. A. A.: Multivariate Analysis of Rainfall Spatial 

Distribution and Its Effect on Stormwater Magnitudes, Journal of Hydrologic Engineering, 29, 05024002, 

10.1061/JHYEFF.HEENG -5941, 2024. 

Nearing, G. S., Kratzert, F., Sampson, A. K., Pelissier, C. S., Klotz, D., Frame, J. M., Prieto, C., and Gupta, H. 

V.: What Role Does Hydrological Science Play in the Age of Machine Learning?, Water Resources Research, 

57, 10.1029/2020wr028091, 2021. 

Niu, G. -Y., Yang, Z. -L., Mitchell, K. E., Chen, F., Ek, M. B., Barlage, M., Kumar, A., Manning, K., Niyogi, D., 

Rosero, E., Tewari, M., and Xia, Y.: The community Noah land surface model with multiparameterization 

options (Noah -MP): 1. Model description an d evaluation with local -scale measurements, Journal of 

Geophysical Research, 116, 10.1029/2010jd015139, 2011. 

Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., and Karniadakis, G. E.: Physics -informed neural networks: A deep learning 

framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, 

Journal of Computational Physics, 378, 686 -707, 10. 1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045, 2019. 

Read, J. S., Jia, X., Willard, J., Appling, A. P., Zwart, J. A., Oliver, S. K., Karpatne, A., Hansen, G. J. A., Hanson, 

P. C., Watkins, W., Steinbach, M., and Kumar, V.: Process‐Guided Deep Learning Predictions of Lake Water 

Temperature, Water Resources Re search, 55, 9173 -9190, 10.1029/2019wr024922, 2019. 

Reichstein, M., Camps -Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J., Carvalhais, N., and Prabhat: Deep 

learning and process understanding for data -driven Earth system science, Nature, 566, 195 -204, 

10.1038/s41586 -019 -0912 -1, 2019. 

Shen, C.: A Transdisciplinary Review of Deep Learning Research and Its Relevance for Water Resources 

Scientists, Water Resources Research, 54, 8558 -8593, 10.1029/2018wr022643, 2018. 

Shen, C., Appling, A. P., Gentine, P., Bandai, T., Gupta, H., Tartakovsky, A., Baity -Jesi, M., Fenicia, F., Kifer, 

D., Li, L., Liu, X., Ren, W., Zheng, Y., Harman, C. J., Clark, M., Farthing, M., Feng, D., Kumar, P., Aboelyazeed, 

D., Rahmani, F., Song, Y., Beck, H. E., Bindas, T., Dwivedi, D., Fang, K., Höge, M., Rackauckas, C., Mohanty, 

B., Roy, T., Xu, C., and Lawson, K.: Differentiable modelling to unify machine learning and physical models 

for geosciences, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 4, 552 -567, 10.1038/s43017 -023 -00450 -9, 2023. Solomon, O., Akintola, O., Jimoh, R., Gbadebo, O., and Faloye, O.: Review and Comparative Study of 

Hydrological Models for Rainfall -Runoff Modelling, International Journal of Environment and 

Geoinformatics, 11, 119 -129, 10.30897/ijegeo.1514176, 2024. 

Song, Y., Bindas, T., Shen, C., Ji, H., Knoben, W. J. M., Lonzarich, L., Clark, M. P., Liu, J., van Werkhoven, K., 

Lamont, S., Denno, M., Pan, M., Yang, Y., Rapp, J., Kumar, M., Rahmani, F., Thébault, C., Adkins, R., Halgren, 

J., Patel, T., Patel, A., Sawa dekar, K. A., and Lawson, K.: High‐Resolution National‐Scale Water Modeling Is 

Enhanced by Multiscale Differentiable Physics‐Informed Machine Learning, Water Resources Research, 

61, 10.1029/2024wr038928, 2025. 

Tsai, W. P., Feng, D., Pan, M., Beck, H., Lawson, K., Yang, Y., Liu, J., and Shen, C.: From calibration to 

parameter learning: Harnessing the scaling effects of big data in geoscientific modeling, Nat Commun, 12, 

5988, 10.1038/s41467 -021 -26107 -z, 2021. 

Wang, Y. H. and Gupta, H. V.: A Mass‐Conserving‐Perceptron for Machine‐Learning‐Based Modeling of 

Geoscientific Systems, Water Resources Research, 60, 10.1029/2023wr036461, 2024a. 

Wang, Y. H. and Gupta, H. V.: Towards Interpretable Physical‐Conceptual Catchment‐Scale Hydrological 

Modeling Using the Mass‐Conserving‐Perceptron, Water Resources Research, 60, 

10.1029/2024wr037224, 2024b. 

Wang, Y. H. and Gupta, H. V.: Using Machine Learning to Discover Parsimonious and Physically‐ 

Interpretable Representations of Catchment‐Scale Rainfall‐Runoff Dynamics, Water Resources Research, 

61, 10.1029/2025wr040178, 2025. 

Willard, J., Jia, X., Xu, S., Steinbach, M., and Kumar, V.: Integrating scientific knowledge with machine 

learning for engineering and environmental systems, ACM Computing Surveys, 55, 1 -37, 2022. 

## Table S1. Median predictive performance across the 15 study catchments measured using 

## the  𝑲𝑮 𝑬 𝒔𝒔  for all model structures and boundary -condition scenarios. 

## Model  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  Model  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  Model  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  Model  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠 

## M1_NP  0.62  M1_PND  0.62  M1_NP_DR  0.73  M1_PND_DR  0.73 

## M2_NP  0.71  M2_PND  0.71  M2_NP_DR  0.71  M2_PND_DR  0.72 

## M3_NP  0.71  M3_PND  0.71  M3_NP_DR  0.71  M3_PND_DR  0.71 

## M4_NP  0.74  M4_PND  0.74  M4_NP_DR  0.74  M4_PND_DR  0.73 

## M5_NP  0.77  M5_PND  0.76  M5_NP_DR  0.77  M5_PND_DR  0.76 

## LSTM  0.80 

## Table S2. Percentile statistics of predictive performance across the 15 study catchments 

## measured using  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  . The table summarizes the distribution of model performance for each 

## configuration, including the minimum value, 5th percentile, quartiles, median, and 95th percentile. The LSTM model exhibits higher lower -percentile performance, indicating more 

## consistent skill across basins, while the upper percentiles of the MCP configurations approach 

## the performance of the LSTM benchmark. 

Model  Worst KGE  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑆𝑆  

> 5%

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑆𝑆  

> 25%

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑆𝑆  

> 50%

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑆𝑆  

> 75%

𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑆𝑆 

> 95%

M1_NP  0.16  0.18  0.47  0.62  0.72  0.77 

M2_NP  0.21  0.21  0.56  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M3_NP  0.19  0.20  0.57  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M4_NP  0.23  0.26  0.62  0.74  0.81  0.87 

M5_NP  0.23  0.26  0.61  0.77  0.81  0.89 

M1_PND  0.16  0.18  0.47  0.62  0.72  0.77 

M2_PND  0.21  0.21  0.58  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M3_PND  0.19  0.20  0.58  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M4_PND  0.26  0.28  0.62  0.74  0.82  0.89 

M5_PND  0.28  0.28  0.63  0.76  0.82  0.89 

M1_NP_DR  0.20  0.20  0.49  0.73  0.75  0.82 

M2_NP_DR  0.19  0.20  0.57  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M3_NP_DR  0.19  0.20  0.59  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M4_NP_DR  0.24  0.27  0.62  0.74  0.81  0.87 

M5_NP_DR  0.24  0.27  0.63  0.77  0.81  0.89 

M1_PND_DR  0.20  0.20  0.49  0.73  0.75  0.82 

M2_PND_DR  0.19  0.20  0.58  0.72  0.80  0.87 

M3_PND_DR  0.19  0.20  0.59  0.71  0.80  0.87 

M4_PND_DR  0.27  0.28  0.62  0.73  0.82  0.88 

M5_PND_DR  0.28  0.28  0.63  0.76  0.83  0.89 

LSTM  0.69  0.72  0.76  0.80  0.85  0.92 

## Table S3. Incremental improvements in predictive performance relative to the baseline model 

## (M1) measured as ΔKGE _{ss} . Statistics are computed across the 15 study catchments for 

## models M2 –M5 under four boundary -condition scenarios: standard without drainage (NP), 

## ponding without drainage (PND), standard with drainage (NP_DR), and ponding with drainage 

## (PND_DR). 

## Scenario  Model  Median ΔKGE_{ss}  Mean ΔKGE_{ss}  Max ΔKGE_{ss} 

## NP  M2  0.08  0.08  0.28 

## NP  M3  0.08  0.09  0.28 

## NP  M4  0.09  0.11  0.26 

## NP  M5  0.08  0.11  0.30 

## PND  M2  0.08  0.09  0.28 

## PND  M3  0.08  0.09  0.25 

## PND  M4  0.10  0.11  0.29 

## PND  M5  0.11  0.12  0.29 

## NP_DR  M2  0.05  0.05  0.16 

## NP_DR  M3  0.06  0.05  0.14 NP_DR  M4  0.05  0.07  0.24 

## NP_DR  M5  0.08  0.08  0.23 

## PND_DR  M2  0.06  0.05  0.16 

## PND_DR  M3  0.05  0.05  0.14 

## PND_DR  M4  0.07  0.07  0.24 

## PND_DR  M5  0.08  0.08  0.24 

## Table S4. Influence of boundary conditions on predictive performance for the best -performing 

## model structure in each region. Differences are computed relative to the corresponding no -

## drainage or no -ponding configuration.                                

> Region Best Model
> Structure
> Best
> Median
> KGE
> NP_DR −
> NP
> PND_DR −
> PND
> PND −
> NP
> PND_DR −
> NP_DR
> Arid Region M4 0.79 0.06 0.07 −0.008 0.01
> Historical Rainfall
> Dominated M5 0.85 −0.017 −0.035 0.02 −0.007
> Recent Rainfall
> Dominated (East) M5 0.79 −0.098 −0.117 0.001 0.001
> Recent Rainfall
> Dominated (West) M4 0.80 −0.088 −0.078 0.004 0.0004
> Snow Dominated M5 0.71 0.41 0.42 0.01 0.01

## Figure S1 . Basin -level comparison of predictive performance across model 

## configurations. The heatmap shows  𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  values for each model configuration 

## across the 15 study catchments, grouped by hydroclimatic region. Columns 

## represent the different model structures and boundary -condition scenarios (NP, 

## PND, NP_DR, and PND_DR), while rows correspond to individual catchm ents. 

## Warmer colors indicate higher predictive skill. The heatmap highlights systematic 

## improvements in performance as model structural complexity increases from M1 

## to M5 and reveals substantial performance gains when vertical drainage processes 

## are includ ed. Figure S2 . Evolution of predictive performance ( 𝐾𝐺 𝐸 𝑠𝑠  ) with increasing model 

## structural complexity (M1 –M5) across the 15 study catchments under four 

## boundary -condition scenarios: NP, PND, NP_DR, and PND_DR. Thin lines 

## represent individual basin responses, while bold lines indicate the median 

## performance acro ss all catchments. The figure illustrates how progressively 

## augmenting the physical representation of hydrological processes improves 

## predictive skill across basins. Figure S3. Taylor diagram comparing the performance of MCP model 

## configurations and the LSTM benchmark across the study catchments. The 

## diagram summarizes correlation, standard deviation, and root -mean -square error 

## relative to observations. Figure S4. Radar plots showing the decomposition of the Kling –Gupta Efficiency 

## components (correlation, variability ratio, and bias) for the MCP model 

## configurations and the LSTM benchmark.