Title: Verify Smarter, Evolve Further: Efficient Harness Evolution through Behavior-Aware Verification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27311v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 01:29:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Verify Smarter, Evolve Further: Efficient Harness Evolution through Behavior-Aware Verification 

Jinghan Xu 1,2 , Yikai Zhang 2,3 , Aili Chen 2,3 , Weiyuan Li 1,2 , Jiaqing Liang 1,2 , Deqing Yang 1,2 *1School of Data Science, Fudan University, 

> 2

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science, 

> 3

College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University 

jhxu25@m.fudan.edu.cn, yangdeqing@fudan.edu.cn 

Abstract 

Agent harnesses shape how language-model agents use instructions, tools, and runtime components, but adapting these harnesses re-quires costly verification. Existing propose-and-verify methods typically score every can-didate on a fixed task set, wasting rollouts on unrelated behaviors and allowing aggre-gate scores to obscure specific regressions. We introduce H ARNESS LENS , a budget-aware framework for automated harness evolution. HARNESS LENS jointly explores the task space and user-configurable components, derives can-didate modifications from execution trajecto-ries, and selectively verifies each candidate on behavior-relevant tasks using an attributable-evidence gate. Across three agent harnesses and four benchmarks, HARNESS LENS im-proves average held-out performance by 7.6– 13.6% while consuming substantially less eval-uation budget than competing baselines. These results demonstrate that behavior-aware veri-fication with explicit attribution enables more reliable and sample-efficient harness evolution under constrained interaction budgets. Our code is available at https://github.com/ jhxu5214/HarnessLens .

1 Introduction 

An agent harness determines how a language-model agent perceives tasks, uses tools, and acts in an environment through diverse components such as instructions, skills, tool descriptions, memory, permissions, and agent roles (Lin et al., 2026b; Chen et al., 2026; Ning et al., 2026). It substan-tially shapes how large language models (LLMs) execute tasks and significantly affects their perfor-mance (Lee et al., 2026b; Lin et al., 2026b). How-ever, building an effective harness is usually non-trivial and requires substantial manual effort, while a configuration developed for one model or environ-ment may not be transferable. This raises a critical 

> *

Corresponding author. Fixed Batch / Random Batch Ours: Behaior-Aware Batch 

> ATM Free Fund Duplicate charge
> Card replacement
> Balance Inquiry Cancel Order Return item Exchange item Track Delivery
> ATM Free Fund Cancel Order Return item
> Few candidate-relevant tasks Mostly candidate-relevant tasks
> Balance Inquiry
> Candidate-Aware Selection
> Signal Diluted by Rollout Variation! Signal Stands Out from Variation!
> One Expensive verification step
> Candidate Harness H’
> Needs Verification
> Several budget-efficient steps
> Given Verification Budget

Figure 1: Comparison of verification paradigms: 

Fixed or random batches dilute candidate-specific sig-nals, while our behavior-aware batches enable clearer and more efficient verification. 

question: can an agent harness autonomously and continually evolve from the interaction evi-dence generated during task execution? 

To solve this problem, existing methods gener-ally follow a propose-and-verify paradigm: they propose candidate modifications based on previ-ous interactions and verify them through additional task rollouts. This paradigm is commonly applied to prompt and program optimization (Yang et al., 2024; Opsahl-Ong et al., 2024; Yuksekgonul et al., 2024) and is increasingly applied to richer harness components (Lou et al., 2026; Hao et al., 2026; Lee et al., 2026b; Zhang et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026b; Chen et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2026). Across these methods, verification typically relies on fixed task sets (Lin et al., 2026b; Chen et al., 2026), ran-domly sampled minibatches (Agrawal et al., 2026), or task subsets preselected before evolution (Pan et al., 2026), with some methods further adopting staged screening (Luo et al., 2026). 1arXiv:2608.27311v1 [cs.AI] 27 Aug 2026 However, these methods suffer from a fundamen-tal limitation: they use the same evaluation tasks for different modifications, even when these modifi-cations target different behaviors. As illustrated in Figure 1, many tasks in such sets may be unrelated to the intended effect of a modification, causing unnecessary rollouts and diluting the modification signal in aggregate metrics. Moreover, verifica-tion results may fail to reveal whether the intended behavior has actually emerged when the selected tasks do not cover the affected behaviors. Although recent methods improve trajectory diagnosis (Lin et al., 2026b; Chen et al., 2026) or reduce verifi-cation cost through task sampling (Agrawal et al., 2026), preselected task coresets (Pan et al., 2026), or staged screening (Luo et al., 2026), a key limita-tion persists: verification tasks are still not adapted to the behavioral effect of each modification, and evaluation evidence is not systematically reused to guide subsequent evolution. To address this gap, we introduce HAR -

> NESS

LENS , a budget-aware framework for au-tonomous harness evolution with behavior-aware verification. It selects verification tasks based on supporting trajectories, task patterns, affected com-ponents, and regression risks, and compares candi-date trajectories to attribute behavioral changes and preserve existing capabilities. H ARNESS LENS con-tains three stages: Context Exploration character-izes tasks and user-configurable components, Tra-jectory Diagnosis extracts reusable experiences and deficiencies from rollouts, and Harness Evolu-tion constructs and verifies modifications using the collected evidence. Each rollout therefore evalu-ates current candidates while contributing evidence for future evolution. We evaluate H ARNESS LENS on three agent har-nesses across four benchmarks: τ 3-bench Banking Knowledge (Shi et al., 2026), τ 2-bench Retail (Bar-res et al., 2025), Terminal-Bench 2.0 (Merrill et al., 2026), and the Challenging subset of BIRD Mini-Dev (Li et al., 2024). Under the given budgets, HARNESS LENS improves initial harnesses and out-performs fixed-set verification methods, yielding average performance improvements of 7.6–13.6% across harnesses with a substantially smaller joint rollout-and-analysis budget. Our contributions are as follows: • We propose a behavior-aware approach to har-ness self-evolution that selects verification tasks and allocates rollouts for each modifi-cation, instead of evaluating all modifications on the same task set. • We introduce H ARNESS LENS , a budget-aware and harness-independent framework that dis-covers user-configurable components and their update mechanisms at runtime, diag-noses interaction trajectories, and iteratively proposes, verifies, and reviews harness modi-fications. • We evaluate H ARNESS LENS across three agent harnesses and four benchmarks. It achieves better test performance than exist-ing methods with substantially fewer rollouts, improving success rates by up to 13.6% on OpenCode, 7.6% on Codex, and 9.2% on Pi. 

2 Related Work 

Self-improving agents and harness evolution. 

Self-improving agents use interaction feedback to revise the scaffolds that shape their behavior. Ear-lier methods operate on relatively lightweight struc-tures, improving prompts (Agrawal et al., 2026), workflow graphs (Zhang et al., 2025), prompt-level harness specifications (Lee et al., 2026a), or do-main scaffolds (Hao et al., 2026). Harness evo-lution expands this scope: some methods syn-thesize or rewrite harness programs (Lou et al., 2026; Lee et al., 2026b), while others update user-configurable components such as prompts, tools, skills, memory, middleware, and orchestration (Lin et al., 2026b; Zhang et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2026), or accumulate trajectory-derived procedural state (Du et al., 2026). Harness evolution has also been studied for nonstationary task streams (Liu et al., 2026), long-running environments (Karten et al., 2026), and test-time adaptation without la-bels (Nie et al., 2026). However, candidate-based approaches typically use fixed or shared verifica-tion tasks across modifications, wasting rollouts on unaffected behaviors and diluting modification-specific evidence. H ARNESS LENS instead selects informative verification tasks for each modifica-tion. 

Harness verification and rollout allocation. Ex-isting methods use verification rollouts to decide whether to accept candidate modifications. Most evaluate all candidates on a shared, predefined task collection, including fixed or held-out sets (Lee et al., 2026b; Zhang et al., 2026; Huang et al., 2026) 2I

> Harness-Space Exploration
> Interact with the raw harness to identify editable components and their characteristics.

Context Exploration  

> Task-Space Exploration
> Read Train-split task queries and organize them without any task execution.
> raw Harness Train Tasks Skills
> Tools Prompts Interact ....
> Task-Specific Global
> 1

12 

> Initial Rollout
> Queries raw Harness
> rollout@2 Trajectories

Trajectory Diagnosis 

> Experience Extraction
> Trajectories
> experience with supporting trajectories

Experience Analysis 

> Candidate Edit & Condensed Evidence

3 Harness Evolution 

> Label
> Reusable Experience
> Recurring Deficiencies

Evolution Agent    

> Schedule the evolution loop make decisions under budget constraints
> Decision
> Accept Reject Revise
> Budget Exploration insights I

Trajzctory Diagnosis 

> Modified Harness
> Verification Rollout Experience Extraction
> Experience Analysis
> Behavior-to-Channel Attribution Assess Preservation Goals Constraints tools ...
> Grouped by exploration result
> Organize evidence Identify behaviors
> Behavior-to-Channel Attribution
> Candidate Proposal
> validation task Tailored Verification

Figure 2: Overview of H ARNESS LENS . Context Exploration characterizes available tasks and identifies user-configurable components. Trajectory Diagnosis extracts and analyzes rollout evidence and is reused within Harness Evolution, which constructs and verifies modifications. The entire process is constrained by a fixed interaction budget. 

and current evaluation batches (Nie et al., 2026). Other approaches narrow verification to predefined flaw- or failure-related tasks (Chen et al., 2026; Cai et al., 2026) or reduce cost using a globally preselected coreset (Pan et al., 2026). In contrast, HARNESS LENS adapts verification tasks and roll-out allocation to each modification’s intended be-havior, affected components, regression risks, and accumulated evidence, reducing irrelevant rollouts while preserving modification-specific signals. 

3 Problem Formulation 

We first define the optimization scope of harness evolution, including the user-configurable compo-nents of a harness framework, the resulting harness space, and the modifications used to generate can-didate harnesses. We then formulate harness evolu-tion as a budget-constrained optimization problem. 

3.1 Definitions Definition 1 (Components and Harness ). Aharness framework F exposes a set of user-configurable components, 

CF = {c1, . . . , c m}.

These components may include instructions, skills, prompt templates, tools and integrations, agent roles, and runtime extensions exposed through predefined interfaces. Each component 

c ∈ C F has a configuration space Xc, whose ele-ments specify the content and instances configured for that component. A concrete harness is repre-sented as 

H =  F, h, h = ( hc)c∈C F , hc ∈ X c.

For a fixed framework F, we define the admissi-ble harness space as 

HF ⊆ {F} × Y

c∈C F

Xc.

Harnesses in this space may differ in the con-tent and instances configured through the user-configurable components, while sharing the same component types, execution mechanisms, and un-derlying framework. 

Definition 2 (Agent ). An agent is a base language model operating within a concrete harness: 

Aθ, H = ( Mθ, H),

where Mθ is a base language model parameterized by θ and H ∈ HF .

Definition 3 (Modification and Candidate ). Un-der a fixed framework F, an admissible harness 3modification operates on the joint component con-figuration: 

δ : Y

> c∈C F

Xc → Y

> c∈C F

Xc.

Given a harness H = ( F, h), applying δ pro-duces a candidate harness 

H′ =  F, δ (h) ∈ HF .

Thus, the modification changes the configuration of one or more user-configurable components while leaving F unchanged. Throughout this work, we consider harness evo-lution under a fixed base model and a fixed har-ness framework. Thus, θ and F remain unchanged, while evolution operates only over the admissible component configurations in HF .

3.2 Optimization Objective 

For a task x ∼ D , the agent Aθ, H induces a trajec-tory 

τ = ( o0, a 0, o 1, a 1, . . . , o T ), τ ∼ p(τ | x; Mθ, H),

where ot and at denote the observation and action at step t, respectively. Each trajectory receives a bi-nary reward R(x, τ ) ∈ { 0, 1}, indicating whether the task is successfully completed. We refer to a be-havior as a recurring, model-visible pattern within such trajectories: which actions the agent takes, in what order, and under which conditions. Behaviors are identified from trajectories rather than from re-wards, so trajectories receiving the same reward may still differ in behavior. Let Ttrain and Ttest be disjoint task sets sampled from the target task distribution D. Only Ttrain is accessible during harness evolution, whereas Ttest 

remains held out for final evaluation. Starting from an initial harness H0 ∈ HF , our objective is to find an evolved harness that maxi-mizes the expected task success rate under a fixed interaction budget: 

H∗ = arg max 

> H∈ HF

Ex∼D , τ ∼p(τ |x;Mθ ,H) [R(x, τ )] ,

s.t. C(H0 ⇝ H) ≤ B, 

where B denotes the interaction budget and 

C(H0 ⇝ H) denotes the number of LLM sessions and task trials consumed along the evolution path from H0 to H, including the initial rollout, Context Exploration, Trajectory Diagnosis, and Harness Evolution. Here, an LLM session refers to one complete multi-turn execution of a model-based role. Since Ttrain participates in harness evolution, generalization performance is measured by the pass rate on the held-out set Ttest .

4 Method 

Under the budgeted objective in Section 3.2, H AR -

> NESS

LENS evolves the configurable state h0 within the fixed harness framework F under interaction budget B. A deterministic controller coordinates the procedure, tracks budget consumption, isolates candidate executions, manages rollout reuse, and enforces update criteria. Further implementation details appear in Appendix A.1, A.3, and A.4. As illustrated in Figure 2, H ARNESS LENS con-tains three components: Context Exploration 

(Section 4.1) characterizes tasks and editable com-ponents; Trajectory Diagnosis (Section 4.2) pro-cesses trajectories from initial and verification roll-outs; and Harness Evolution (Section 4.3) uses its outputs to select proposals, construct candidate har-nesses, and verify them before updating the current harness. 

4.1 Context Exploration 

Context Exploration provides the task organiza-tion and editable-component information needed for subsequent behavior-aware verification. Task-Space Exploration characterizes task organization from available task context, while Harness-Space Exploration identifies the user-configurable compo-nents of F and their editable scope. Their outputs ground Trajectory Diagnosis and focus later roll-outs on relevant behaviors and regressions. 

Task-Space Exploration. To support behavior-aware verification, Task-Space Exploration orga-nizes Ttrain according to task goals. For each task, the module inspects only the query, environment instructions and policies, and tool and parameter de-scriptions. It assigns tasks to groups based on their primary user goals and records additional goals when a task spans multiple groups. This group-ing provides a compact view of recurring task pat-terns and overlaps across goals. The resulting task groups guide verification-task selection and regres-sion checks but are not incorporated into h. At this stage, Task-Space Exploration executes no tasks and has no access to trajectories, task outcomes, or 

Ttest .4Harness-Space Exploration. To identify the components available for evolution, Harness-Space Exploration examines the configuration, documen-tation, and runtime behavior of F. For each user-configurable component c ∈ C F , the mod-ule records how it is exposed to the agent, where its effects apply, how it can be updated, and what behaviors may be affected by a change. Only com-ponents that can be reliably identified and updated are retained for subsequent evolution. These com-ponent descriptions later help connect diagnosed behaviors to candidate modifications and potential regressions. 

4.2 Trajectory Diagnosis 

Building on Context Exploration , Trajectory Di-agnosis converts trajectories into behavioral evi-dence through Experience Extraction and Experi-ence Analysis . It is applied to the initial rollout 

under H0 and to each verification rollout during 

Harness Evolution .

Experience Extraction. Task rewards alone do not reveal which behaviors should be preserved or improved. The Experience module summarizes tra-jectories under analysis into reusable experiences 

and recurring deficiencies . Each extracted item is linked to the trajectories that support it. To orga-nize this evidence, recurring behaviors are grouped across trajectories, while distinct successful strate-gies are kept separate. The resulting evidence is passed to Experience Analysis for further assess-ment. 

Experience Analysis. To derive candidate mod-ifications from this evidence, the Analyzer com-bines the extracted experiences and deficiencies with the task groups and identified components from Context Exploration , producing a set of mod-ification proposals. Each proposal specifies the tar-geted behavior, the trajectories that support it, and the user-configurable components that can affect that behavior. The Analyzer then checks whether the supporting trajectories provide sufficient evi-dence for the proposed modification and removes proposals that lack such support. The resulting pro-posals and their supporting evidence are passed to 

Harness Evolution , while the extracted experiences remain available for later regression checks. 

4.3 Harness Evolution 

Using the proposals and supporting evidence from 

Trajectory Diagnosis , Harness Evolution iteratively improves the current confirmed harness Hj =(F, hj ). Harness Evolution is carried out by an evo-lution agent, a model-based role that uses the same harness framework F as the target agent Aθ, H but operates independently from it. At each iteration, the evolution agent selects a proposal in Candidate Proposal , chooses its verification tasks in Behavior-Aware Verification , and decides whether the result-ing candidate should replace Hj in Harness Review and Update .

Candidate Proposal. At each iteration, the evo-lution agent considers one proposal from Trajec-tory Diagnosis . The proposal is selected based on its supporting evidence, previous attempts, poten-tial regressions, and the remaining budget. The corresponding modification is applied to a copy of the current confirmed harness using the update mechanism identified for the affected component. Let δj denote this modification. Applying δj to hj

produces the candidate harness 

eHj =  F, δ j (hj ) ∈ HF .

Each new candidate is derived from the current confirmed harness Hj , allowing accepted modi-fications to accumulate across iterations. Before verification, a lightweight runtime check confirms that the modified component has been successfully applied. Candidates that fail this check do not pro-ceed to verification. 

Behavior-Aware Verification. A fixed verifica-tion batch may contain few tasks relevant to the be-havior targeted by a proposal. To focus verification on that behavior, the evolution agent first selects tasks in Ttrain linked to the proposal’s supporting trajectories and then selects additional tasks with related goals, constraints, or tool requirements. It also includes tasks that can reveal potential regres-sions, with broader modifications receiving cov-erage across more task groups. Each verification batch contains at least five distinct tasks, while the controller fixes the number of trials and ensures that the required verification can be completed within the remaining budget. The selected tasks are evaluated under both Hj

and eHj using matched trial conditions. Trajectory Diagnosis is then applied to the resulting trajecto-ries to determine whether δj improves the targeted behavior and introduces any regressions. 

Harness Review and Update. The evolution agent reviews the behavioral evidence and rollout 5metrics to determine whether the observed improve-ment is supported by the trajectories and whether the candidate introduces regressions. Candidates with supported improvements and no observed regression undergo an additional con-firmation on a new batch constructed by the con-troller. The batch retains at most two tasks that require further confirmation and fills the remaining positions with previously unused tasks from Ttrain ,prioritizing task groups not covered in the initial verification. Both Hj and eHj are evaluated on this batch to check whether the observed improvement per-sists and whether the modification affects other tasks. The final decision considers the behavioral evidence together with the primary metric on the confirmation batch; improvement in the primary metric alone is insufficient. The harness is updated according to 

Hj+1 =

( eHj , if the candidate is accepted ,

Hj , otherwise .

If the diagnosis identifies a specific issue with δj

that can be addressed, the evolution agent may ad-just the proposal and verify the resulting candidate again. New issues identified during verification may also lead to new proposals. Evolution ends when no sufficiently supported proposal remains or the remaining budget cannot support another verification cycle. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Experiment Setup Benchmarks and Splits. We evaluate on four environments requiring diverse agent behaviors: 

τ 2-bench Retail (Barres et al., 2025), τ 3-bench Banking Knowledge (Shi et al., 2026), Terminal-Bench 2.0 (Merrill et al., 2026), and the Challeng-ing subset of BIRD Mini-Dev (Li et al., 2024). For each benchmark, we randomly sample 30 tasks for TRAIN; TEST uses the official split where avail-able and otherwise all remaining tasks. The splits are disjoint, and all information from TEST, includ-ing queries, trajectories, and evaluation feedback, is inaccessible throughout harness evolution. Ap-pendix B provides details on the data splits and the full benchmark configuration. 

Agent Harnesses and Model. We con-duct experiments on the following har-nesses: OpenCode (Anomaly, 2026) v1.17.13, Codex CLI (OpenAI, 2026) v0.144.4, and Pi Coding Agent (Zechner, 2025) v0.80.10. All LLM agent and evolution roles use 

deepseek-v4-flash-preview (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2026). To ensure fair evaluation, we disable external information retrieval tools (e.g., web search) and enforce permission controls to prevent answer leakage or unauthorized tool usage. 

Baselines. We compare the initial, unmodified harness H0 with three trajectory-based harness-evolution methods: Self-Harness (Zhang et al., 2026), Meta-Harness (Lee et al., 2026b), and Har-nessFix (Chen et al., 2026) 1 . All methods start from H0 and share the same benchmark runtime and verifier. At their configured maxima, Self-Harness, Meta-Harness, and HarnessFix consume 4,800, 660, and 300 TRAIN rollouts, respectively, whereas H ARNESS LENS is capped at 200 total units, including both task rollouts and LLM ses-sions. Appendix B.4 provides the detailed proto-cols and the calculation of these configured budget maxima. 

5.2 Main Results HARNESS LENS performs best under the small-est budget. HARNESS LENS attains the best or tied-best pass rate in eight of the twelve harness– benchmark pairs in Table 1, while using the small-est configured budget of any evolving method: two-thirds of HarnessFix’s budget and one twenty-fourth of Self-Harness’s budget (Table 9). The gains over H0 are smallest on Retail, where H0 is already at least 75% for every harness, and largest on Banking and BIRD. The budget gap is under-stated because H ARNESS LENS ’s budget counts both LLM sessions and task rollouts, whereas the baseline figures count rollouts alone (Ap-pendix B.4). 

Harness evolution is stable and effective. HAR -

> NESS

LENS never falls below H0, and its worst outcome is an exact tie. Such a tie reflects an unchanged harness rather than a small perfor-mance difference: when no proposal accumulates attributable improvement without an attributable regression, the review conditions of Section 4.3 are never satisfied and the run returns H0. Outcomes thus have only two modes: no edit or an effective 

> 1We follow each baseline’s original evolution-budget con-figuration. All methods use the same 30 TRAIN tasks within each harness–benchmark setting, while some baselines further partition them internally for validation.

6Harness Method τ 2-bench Retail                                                                              

> τ3-bench Banking Terminal-Bench 2.0 BIRD Mini-Dev (Challenging) AVG.
> OpenCode
> H075.00 20.90 33.90 37.50 41.83 Self-Harness 80.00 10.45 32.20 37.50 40.04 Meta-Harness 72.50 13.43 33.90 41.67 40.38 HarnessFix 80.00 22.39 35.59 40.28 44.57
> HarnessLens (Ours) 85.00 25.37 33.90 45.83 47.53
> Codex
> H080.00 13.43 32.84 37.50 40.94 Self-Harness 80.00 13.43 37.29 34.72 41.36 Meta-Harness 72.50 16.42 30.51 37.50 39.23 HarnessFix 80.00 13.43 35.59 37.50 41.63
> HarnessLens (Ours) 80.00 13.43 35.59 47.22 44.06
> Pi
> H085.00 19.40 37.29 40.28 45.49 Self-Harness 85.00 20.90 28.81 33.33 42.01 Meta-Harness 80.00 16.42 33.90 48.61 44.73 HarnessFix 85.00 26.87 35.59 44.44 47.98
> HarnessLens (Ours) 85.00 33.33 37.29 43.06 49.67

Table 1: Performance of different harness-evolution methods across agent harnesses and target benchmarks. Results are reported as pass@1 (%) on the held-out TEST split. The best result in each harness–benchmark setting is shown in bold. 

edit. Together, Self-Harness and Meta-Harness fall below H0 in half of their 24 harness–benchmark pairs and lose about ten points at worst. Behavior-aware verification therefore acts as a filter rather than a search accelerator: an uninformative itera-tion results in a tie rather than a regression. 

More verification rollouts do not imply better harnesses. Performance does not increase with verification budget: Self-Harness uses the most roll-outs but does not achieve the strongest performance, whereas HarnessFix achieves the strongest baseline results with the smallest budget. The key difference is how candidates are accepted. The baselines rely on aggregate pass rates over fixed task splits, where modification-specific gains can be obscured by un-related tasks and trial noise. This may allow chance improvements and undetected regressions to accu-mulate across iterations and become apparent only on TEST. More candidates therefore create more opportunities to accept harmful edits rather than reliably improving the harness. 

6 Analysis 

To understand how H ARNESS LENS achieves effec-tive harness evolution under a limited interaction budget, we analyze two aspects of its behavior-aware verification process. First, we isolate the contributions of behavior-aware batch selection and attributable-evidence gating through ablations. Sec-ond, we examine how task-space structure affects the ability to identify modifications that receive consistent, attributable support across related tasks. Appendix C.2 complements these analyses with decision-level evidence on accepted modifications and budget allocation. 

6.1 Ablation: Selection and Gating 

HARNESS LENS improves verification through two complementary mechanisms: it selects tasks rele-vant to each candidate modification and accepts the modification only when the observed improvement can be attributed to it. We ablate these mechanisms independently to isolate their contributions. 

Settings. All variants use B = 200 and modify only the verification-stage configuration of H AR -

> NESS

LENS ; all other settings follow the main ex-periments. To ablate batch selection, Fixed Batch ,

Random Batch , and RHO-based Batch (Pan et al., 2026) use a fixed subset, a uniformly resampled subset, and RHO-based task selection, respectively, while retaining the attributable-evidence gate. For these variants, we set the verification batch size to 10, or one third of the 30 TRAIN tasks, yielding a verification fraction comparable to the validation fraction used in HarnessFix (Chen et al., 2026). To ablate the acceptance mechanism, Metric-Only Gate retains behavior-aware selection but accepts candidates solely according to the aggregate pri-mary metric. 

Results. Table 2 shows that removing either mechanism substantially weakens performance. Fixed, random, and RHO-based batches frequently include tasks unrelated to the candidate modifica-tion, introducing variation that the diagnostic anal-7Method τ 2-bench Retail 

τ 3-bench Banking BIRD Mini-Dev (Challenging) 

H0 75.00 20.90 37.50 Fixed Batch 75.00 20.90 37.50 Random Batch 75.00 20.90 37.50 RHO-based Batch 75.00 20.90 38.89 Metric-Only Gate 80.00 20.90 37.50 

HarnessLens (Ours) 85.00 25.37 45.83 

Table 2: Ablation of behavior-aware batch selection and attributable-evidence gating on OpenCode. 

ysis cannot attribute to the targeted behavior. Con-sequently, these variants often fail to produce can-didates that pass verification. In contrast, Metric-Only Gate promotes candidates more readily but also accepts aggregate gains unsupported by at-tributable evidence; these gains yield no clear held-out improvement on Banking or BIRD. Overall, behavior-aware selection improves the relevance of verification evidence, while attributable-evidence gating prevents noisy or unsupported gains from being retained. 

6.2 How Does Task Diversity Affect Evolution? 

The gains on Banking and BIRD suggest that evo-lution benefits from recurring, actionable weak-nesses: related tasks can reinforce a modification across examples. Retail instead starts from a strong harness with less potential for further improvement; its trajectories mainly serve as checks for regres-sions, so retaining the original harness is often de-sirable. Figure 3 contrasts the evidence available in BIRD and Terminal-Bench 2.0. In BIRD, several tasks involving extreme-value queries expose the same SQL decision, enabling an attributable re-covery. Terminal tasks involve distinct goals and execution paths; the tested broad rule recovers no tasks and causes an attributable regression, so the gate retains the original harness. This is not merely a TRAIN–TEST mismatch: diversity within both splits limits modifications that are supported by TRAIN and broadly applicable to TEST. This also explains why fixed-set optimizers bene-fit from repetitive objectives that provide consistent signals toward the same direction. SkillBoost (Lin et al., 2026a) similarly finds that optimized skills transfer most naturally between similar tasks. Since our objective is held-out generalization rather than BIRD Concentrated Goups expose a shared decision Task-Space Exploration     

> Filter Listing 9
> Percentage 7
> Extreme Value
> [include bird_212] 6
> Diff./rate 4

...                      

> 30 task -> 6 diffrenet groups
> Tajectory Evidence Gate Outcome
> Shared, Editable Decision
> Extreme-value SQL
> Before ·Tied Minimum [bird_212: 1/2]
> MIN(...) -> ca, k, pb
> After ·deterministic tie break [bird_212: 2/2]
> -> ca
> Tool Description
> ORDER BY count ASC, element ASC LIMIT 1
> Accept Delta
> Recovered: [Bird_212] Regression: None
> Attributable Gain! Final Submission 37.50 →45.83
> After Accept many edits Software eng. 9
> Scientific
> [include dna-insert] 4
> Security 3

Terminal-Bench 2.0 Diverse Goups do not share the broad fix     

> Data proc. 52111

...    

> 30 task -> 6 diffrenet groups
> Broad Startup Rule but Diverse Tasks
> [dna-insert] 0/2 →1/2 goal: primer validity [make-doom-for mips] 0/2 →1/2 goal: MIPS build completion [financial-document processor] 1/2 →0/2
> Reject Delta
> Recovered: None Regression: [financial-document processor]
> No suitable Fix! Final Submission 33.90 →33.90
> Fail to Accept Any edits

Figure 3: Illustrative contrast between task-space struc-ture and evolution evidence. In BIRD, related tasks expose a shared extreme-value SQL decision, enabling an attributable recovery and an accepted edit. Terminal-Bench 2.0 contains more distinct task goals and execu-tion paths; the tested broad rule yields no recovery and causes a regression, so it is rejected. The BIRD TEST result is cumulative across all accepted edits. 

exhaustive TRAIN optimization, high task diver-sity makes broadly effective modifications harder to identify. Appendix C.1 provides an evolution trace for an OpenCode–BIRD run. 

7 Conclusion 

We introduce H ARNESS LENS , a budget-aware framework that evolves agent harnesses through behavior-aware verification. By selecting tasks re-lated to each modification and accepting changes based on attributable behavioral evidence, H AR -

NESS LENS uses limited rollouts more effectively while avoiding unsupported regressions. Across three harnesses and four benchmarks, it consis-tently improves or preserves initial performance and achieves average performance improvements of 7.6–13.6%. These results show that reliable har-ness evolution depends not only on the amount of verification, but also on directing verification to-ward the behaviors each modification is intended to change. 

Limitations 

Our evaluation covers one model family, three har-nesses, and four public benchmarks. While the results consistently support the effectiveness of behavior-aware verification across these settings, its effectiveness under a broader range of models, 8harness architectures, and open-ended deployment environments has not yet been fully validated. In addition, our budget counts LLM sessions and task trials as auditable interaction units, but does not normalize token usage, latency, or monetary cost across roles and benchmarks. 

References 

Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2026. GEPA: Reflective prompt evo-lution can outperform reinforcement learning. In 

The Fourteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .Anomaly. 2026. OpenCode: The open source ai coding agent. https://github.com/anomalyco/ opencode . Accessed: 2026-07-26. Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ 2-bench: Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2506.07982. Qianshu Cai, Yonggang Zhang, Xianzhang Jia, Hua-jiang Zheng, Wei Xue, Jun Song, Xinmei Tian, and Yike Guo. 2026. MOSS: Self-evolution through source-level rewriting in autonomous agent systems. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2605.22794. Mengzhuo Chen, Junjie Wang, Zhe Liu, Yawen Wang, and Qing Wang. 2026. From failed trajectories to reliable LLM agents: Diagnosing and repairing harness flaws. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2606.06324. DeepSeek-AI et al. 2026. DeepSeek-V4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2606.19348. Yuetian Du, Yucheng Wang, He Xu, Jiexu Xu, Shan-wen Tan, Bing Zhao, Boyu Yang, Zhijie Xu, Ming Kong, Hu Wei, Jie Liu, and Qiang Zhu. 2026. Living-Harness is an interactive-agent evolver. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2607.26598. Zhezheng Hao, Hong Wang, Jian Luo, Jianqing Zhang, Yuyan Zhou, Qiang Lin, Can Wang, and Hande Dong. 2026. ReCreate: Reasoning and creating domain agents driven by experience. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2601.11100. Yue Huang, Wenjie Wang, Han Bao, Yuchen Ma, Xi-aonan Luo, Yi Nian, Haomin Zhuang, Zheyuan Liu, Yue Zhao, and Xiangliang Zhang. 2026. MemoHar-ness: Agent harnesses that learn from experience. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2607.14159. Seth Karten, Joel Zhang, Tersoo Upaa Jr., Ruirong Feng, Wenzhe Li, Chengshuai Shi, Chi Jin, and Kiran Vo-drahalli. 2026. Continual harness: Online adaptation for self-improving foundation agents. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2605.09998. Hyunin Lee, Jinglue Xu, Jeffrey Seely, Donghyun Lee, Matei Zaharia, and Yujin Tang. 2026a. Recursive har-ness self-improvement. Computing Research Reposi-tory , arXiv:2607.15524. Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kang-wook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. 2026b. Meta-Harness: End-to-end optimization of model harnesses. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2603.28052. Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al. 2024. Can LLMs already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-SQL. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36. Hongqiang Lin, Chao Liu, Xiaofan Bai, Xuan Jin, Yuhong Li, Nenggan Zheng, and Xipeng Cao. 2026a. Rethinking self-evolution: A constrained exploration-exploitation process for mitigating skill overfitting. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2607.26643. Jiahang Lin, Shichun Liu, Chengjun Pan, Lizhi Lin, Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Xuanjing Huang, and Hang Yan. 2026b. Agentic harness engineering: Observability-driven automatic evolution of coding-agent harnesses. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2604.25850. Zewen Liu, Zhan Shi, Yisi Sang, Bing He, Minhua Lin, Tianxin Wei, Dakuo Wang, Benoit Dumoulin, Wei Jin, and Hanqing Lu. 2026. Adaptive auto-harness: Sustained self-improvement for agentic system de-ployment on open-ended task streams. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2606.01770. Xinghua Lou, Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla, Antoine Dedieu, Carter Wendelken, Wolfgang Lehrach, and Kevin P. Murphy. 2026. AutoHarness: improving LLM agents by automatically synthesizing a code harness. Com-puting Research Repository , arXiv:2603.03329. Xiaotian Luo, Fengxingyu Wang, Chuanrui Hu, Dizhan Xue, and Yafeng Deng. 2026. Self-evolving agent harnesses via gated semantic quality-diversity. Com-puting Research Repository , arXiv:2607.13683. Mike A. Merrill, Alexander G. Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, et al. 2026. Terminal-bench: Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in com-mand line interfaces. Computing Research Reposi-tory , arXiv:2601.11868. Jun Nie, Yonggang Zhang, Jun Song, Qianshu Cai, Da-hai Yu, Yike Guo, Xinmei Tian, and Bo Han. 2026. TTHE: Test-time harness evolution. Computing Re-search Repository , arXiv:2607.08124. 

9Xuying Ning, Katherine Tieu, Dongqi Fu, Tianxin Wei, Zihao Li, Yuanchen Bei, Jiaru Zou, Mengting Ai, Zhining Liu, Ting-Wei Li, Lingjie Chen, Yanjun Zhao, Ke Yang, Bingxuan Li, Cheng Qian, Gaotang Li, Xiao Lin, Zhichen Zeng, Ruizhong Qiu, and 23 others. 2026. Code as agent harness. Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2605.18747. OpenAI. 2026. Codex: A lightweight coding agent. 

https://github.com/openai/codex . Accessed: 2026-07-26. Krista Opsahl-Ong, Michael J. Ryan, Josh Purtell, David Broman, Christopher Potts, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2024. Optimizing instructions and demonstrations for multi-stage language model programs. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Wenbo Pan, Shujie Liu, Chin-Yew Lin, Jingying Zeng, Xianfeng Tang, Xiangyang Zhou, Yan Lu, and Xi-aohua Jia. 2026. Evolving agents in the dark: Ret-rospective harness optimization via self-preference. 

Computing Research Repository , arXiv:2606.05922. Quan Shi, Alexandra Zytek, Pedram Razavi, Karthik Narasimhan, and Victor Barres. 2026. τ -knowledge: Evaluating conversational agents over unstructured knowledge. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2603.04370. Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. 2024. Large language models as optimizers. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. 2024. TextGrad: Automatic “differentia-tion” via text. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2406.07496. Mario Zechner. 2025. Pi agent harness. https: //github.com/earendil-works/pi . Accessed: 2026-07-26. Hangfan Zhang, Shao Zhang, Kangcong Li, Chen Zhang, Yang Chen, Yiqun Zhang, Lei Bai, and Shuyue Hu. 2026. Self-harness: Harnesses that im-prove themselves. Computing Research Repository ,arXiv:2606.09498. Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. 2025. AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .

10 A Implementation and Verification Details 

This appendix provides implementation details for the three components of H ARNESS LENS described in Section 4: Context Exploration, Trajectory Di-agnosis, and Harness Evolution. It specifies the controller procedure, budget accounting, role inter-faces, editable harness components, and verifica-tion protocol used in our experiments. 

A.1 Controller Procedure and Budget Accounting 

Algorithm 1 instantiates the procedure in Section 4. Each candidate is constructed from the current con-firmed harness, so accepted modifications accumu-late and rejected candidates leave the current har-ness unchanged. All model-based roles run in fresh sessions and communicate only through schema-validated artifacts. Every task rollout and LLM session consumes one unit of the interaction budget B, as specified in Section 3.2. With 30 TRAIN tasks and K = 2 

trials per task, the initial rollout costs 30 K = 60 

units. For a verification batch of n tasks against the current harness Hj , the required cost is 

C1(n, Hj ) = 6 + nK  1 + I[Hj̸ = H0]

+ 2 

l n

3

m

,

The fixed six units cover proposal selection, can-didate editing, the runtime check, two analyses of intended effects and regressions, and the final re-view. The rollout term covers candidate trials and, when Hj̸ = H0, fresh trials under the current har-ness. The final term covers independently reviewed behavior comparisons in bundles of at most three tasks. The confirmation round always collects fresh trials under both harnesses and costs 

C2(n) = 3 + 2 nK + 2 

l n

3

m

.

Before an iteration starts, the controller checks that the remaining budget covers both rounds and a three-unit retry buffer. Invalid structured outputs may be retried once for exploration and twice for diagnosis or review; every retry remains charged. If the remaining budget cannot support both rounds, the controller does not start another candidate iter-ation. For example, with K = 2 , a five-task verifica-tion against H0 costs 20 units because its initial 

Algorithm 1 Controller-level implementation of HARNESS LENS .                                                                        

> Require: H0,Ttrain ,B,K= 2
> Ensure: Confirmed harness H
> 1: Run the initial rollout of H0on Ttrain with Ktrials per task 2: Run Task-Space and Harness-Space Exploration 3: Apply Trajectory Diagnosis to the initial trajectories to obtain proposals 4: H ← H 0
> 5: while a supported proposal and a complete verification cycle remain do
> 6: Evolution agent selects proposal pand batch S,|S| ≥
> 5
> 7: eH ← Edit( H, p )
> 8: if the modified component passes the runtime check
> then
> 9: if H=H0then
> 10: Reuse the initial trajectories for H0on S
> 11: else
> 12: Evaluate Hon S
> 13: end if
> 14: Evaluate eHon Swith matched trials 15: Apply Trajectory Diagnosis to the paired trajecto-ries 16: Evolution agent reviews the verification evidence and metrics 17: if attributable positive evidence and no attributable regression then
> 18: Construct confirmation batch S′(Section A.4.1) 19: Evaluate both harnesses on S′under fresh matched conditions 20: Apply Trajectory Diagnosis to the confirmation trajectories 21: Evolution agent reviews the confirmation evi-dence and metrics 22: if supported evidence remains and the primary metric improves then
> 23: H ← eH
> 24: end if
> 25: end if
> 26: end if
> 27: Add revised or newly diagnosed proposals 28: Update the evidence history and remaining budget 29: end while
> 30: return H

trajectories are reused, and the corresponding con-firmation round costs 27 units. If the current har-ness differs from H0, a six-task verification and confirmation round cost 34 and 31 units, respec-tively. Including the three-unit retry buffer, this six-task iteration requires 34 + 31 + 3 = 68 avail-able units. The controller starts an iteration only when the complete two-round cycle is affordable and returns the current confirmed harness other-wise. 

A.2 Role Interfaces 

Table 3 summarizes the visible inputs, excluded information, and outputs of the model-based roles used by H ARNESS LENS . Within Trajectory Diag-11 nosis, behavior comparison is performed without access to the candidate diff; the subsequent assess-ment of intended effects and regressions receives the diff only after that comparison is complete. Task- and Harness-Space Exploration use at most 30 agent steps, the Harness Editor at most 40, and the Trajectory Diagnosis and evolution-agent roles at most 60. Their complete prompts and output schemas are included in the anonymized software supplement. All roles use the same high-reasoning profile as the evaluated agents, with a 65,536-token context limit and a 24,576-token out-put limit. Exploration sessions have a 1,800-second wall-clock limit and the remaining roles have a 3,600-second limit. 

A.3 Harness Search Spaces 

Each candidate is an isolated snapshot of the cur-rent configurable state hj and the task project. The harness framework, base model, provider, permis-sions, benchmark tools, and evaluator state remain fixed. Patches to tool and parameter descriptions must bind to exact names already exposed by the environment and therefore cannot introduce new tools. Before verification, a one-trial load check records the effective startup instructions, discov-ered skill metadata, tool schema, and lifecycle con-figuration. A candidate is rejected without rollout if a modified component has no applicable checker or its content is absent from the effective runtime context. This prevents edits to inert files from being credited as behavioral changes. 

A.4 Verification and Update Protocol A.4.1 Task Selection 

The evolution agent assigns each task in an initial verification batch one of the four selection labels in Table 5. The labels record each task’s role in testing the targeted behavior and detecting potential regressions. A verification batch contains at least five distinct TRAIN tasks, including at least one conversion task and one task linked to the proposal’s supporting trajectory. Remaining positions cover related task groups, affected tools, and preservation risks. The evolution agent selects the tasks and provides their selection labels and evidence links; the controller validates task distinctness, batch size, trial count, and affordability. The confirmation round has the same batch size but uses mostly fresh tasks. It retains at most 

min(2 , n − 1) verification tasks that require further confirmation and fills the remaining positions with previously unused TRAIN tasks that succeeded un-der the initial harness. The controller prioritizes task groups not represented in the verification and reuses other verification tasks only when fresh eli-gible tasks are exhausted. 

A.4.2 Paired Rollouts and Review 

Each round uses two paired trials per task. Trials under the current and candidate harnesses share benchmark-controlled conditions within a round, while the confirmation round uses fresh trial seeds. For interactive benchmarks, the user-simulator seed is determined by the domain, task ID, and trial index; target-agent seeds additionally include an agent namespace. Pairing reduces avoidable vari-ation but does not assume provider-side determin-ism. Based on the binary rewards defined in Sec-tion 3.2, behavior comparison assigns each task one of the labels in Table 6. Comparison reports are independently checked against the source trajectories before verification-stage Trajectory Diagnosis receives the candidate diff. A verification stage advances only if it contains attributable positive evidence and no at-tributable regression. Positive evidence is either an attributed recovery or an attributed stable success with an increased pass count; preservation alone is insufficient. An update additionally requires im-provement under the primary metric on the confir-mation batch and a final accept decision. Evidence from an incomplete or unaffordable confirmation round can inform later proposals but cannot update the confirmed harness. 

B Experimental Protocol 

B.1 Data Splits 

Table 7 gives the fixed split sizes and sampling provenance. The exact ordered task IDs, sampling seed (42), and upstream benchmark revisions are included in the anonymized software supplement. 

B.2 Models, Harnesses, and Runtime Limits 

All evaluated agents and model-based roles use 

deepseek-v4-flash-preview . The evaluated harness versions are OpenCode 1.17.13, Codex CLI 0.144.4, and Pi Coding Agent 0.80.10. Bank-ing Knowledge uses BM25 retrieval. 12 Role Visible information Excluded information Output 

Task-Space Explo-ration TRAIN queries, public policies, and tool schemas Trajectories, rewards, candi-dates, and TEST Task groups Harness-Space Explo-ration Harness documentation and runtime observations Task outcomes and domain-specific proposals Editable-component in-ventory Experience Extraction Model-visible TRAIN trajectories and outcomes Candidate diff and TEST Reusable experiences and recurring deficiencies Experience Analysis Extracted evidence, task groups, and component inventory TEST and hidden references Evidence-supported mod-ification proposals Behavior Comparison Current-harness and candidate trajec-tories Candidate diff and hidden eval-uator explanations Task-level behavior changes Trajectory Diagnosis (verification) Comparison reports, task groups, and candidate diff TEST and hidden references Assessment of intended effects and regressions Harness Editor One proposal, the component inven-tory, and an isolated snapshot of the current harness TEST, credentials, evaluator state, and fixed runtime limits Candidate snapshot and file-level diff Evolution Agent Proposals, evidence history, task-selection records, and budget state TEST and hidden references Proposal selection and candidate acceptance, re-jection, or revision 

Table 3: Information boundaries between the model-based implementation roles. Budget arithmetic and trial counts are controller-owned rather than accepted from model outputs. 

Harness User-configurable components Visibility Main regression risks 

OpenCode Instructions, skills, tool and parameter descrip-tions, agent definitions, commands, reference sources, and compaction configuration Startup, tool schema, skill loading, or lifecycle events Broad prompt effects, context growth, inert files, or authority changes Codex Developer and project instructions, skills, lifecycle-hook context, tool and parameter de-scriptions, and compaction prompt Startup, tool schema, skill loading, or lifecycle events Broad instructions, trigger fail-ure, repeated injection, or con-text loss Pi System-prompt append, project instructions, skills, tool and parameter descriptions, and compaction configuration Startup, tool schema, on-demand reading, or lifecycle events Native-prompt replacement, trust dependence, trigger failure, or context loss 

Table 4: User-configurable components identified by Harness-Space Exploration for the three evaluated harnesses. 

Selection label Criterion 

Conversion Initial failure that directly exercises the proposed behavior Positive control Initial success directly linked to support-ing evidence Preservation Other initial success used to probe col-lateral regression Diagnostic Other initial failure used to test the pro-posal’s scope 

Table 5: Controller records used to construct a verifica-tion batch. 

For τ 2 interaction, the agent may make at most 10 tool calls per conversation turn, 40 conversa-tion turns, and 60 tool calls overall; the per-turn timeout is 180 seconds. The user simulator uses temperature 0.3 and is reset with the stable pairing seed for each trial. Terminal-Bench uses at most 

Status Definition 

Recovered The current harness has no successful trial and the candidate has at least one Stable success The current harness has a successful trial and all candidate trials succeed Regressed The current harness has a successful trial and the candidate has none Still failing Neither harness has a successful trial Mixed All remaining split or partial outcomes 

Table 6: Task-level labels used by behavior comparison. 

50 agent steps, a 600-second agent timeout, and a 1,800-second verifier timeout. BIRD uses at most 30 tool calls per round, a 600-second agent timeout, a 5-second query timeout, and a 30-second grader timeout. Evaluator-owned overrides are applied after candidate-native configuration is loaded. They fix 13 Benchmark TRAIN TEST Sampling record               

> τ2-bench Retail 30 40 Official 40-task TEST split; TRAIN drawn with seed 42 from the other 74 tasks
> τ3-bench Banking Knowledge 30 67 TRAIN drawn with seed 42 from all 97 tasks; TEST is the remainder Terminal-Bench 2.0 30 59 TRAIN drawn with seed 42 from all 89 tasks; TEST is the remainder BIRD Mini-Dev (Challenging) 30 72 TRAIN drawn with seed 42 from the 102 challenging items in official JSONL order; TEST is the remainder

Table 7: Fixed splits used for harness evolution and blind evaluation. Exact ordered IDs and upstream revisions are distributed in the anonymized software supplement. 

the model, provider, task tools, inference limits, and permissions, so a modification cannot change the model, enlarge its own step or token budget, enable external information retrieval, or alter task tools. 

B.3 Metrics and Blind TEST Protocol 

TRAIN uses K = 2 trials per task. Its controller metric is the trial-level pass rate 

PassRate TRAIN = 1

N K 

> N

X

> i=1
> K

X

> r=1

Ri,r , (1) which is used only for update decisions alongside the attributable-evidence gate. Table 1 instead re-ports held-out TEST pass@1: one fresh trial per task under the final selected harness. We use the term pass@1 only for this single-trial TEST metric. Initial and evolved harnesses are evaluated on the same ordered TEST split, with the same runtime limits and pairing offsets. TEST runs through a separate entry point after evolution completes. All information and services associated with TEST— including task IDs, trajectories, evaluation feed-back, and rollout services—are unavailable to ev-ery exploration, diagnosis, proposal, verification, and review role. 

B.4 Baseline Adaptation and Budget Comparability 

All methods use the same initial harness, 30-task TRAIN split, benchmark runtime, verifier, and mechanisms for applying changes to user-configurable components. Adaptations are re-stricted to environment interfaces and do not change a baseline’s proposal or selection policy. Table 8 gives the configured protocols; their ac-tual consumption can be lower because of early stopping, retries, or method-specific validation. For Self-Harness, 20 iterations each evaluate the current harness and three candidates on all 30 tasks with two trials, giving 20 × 4 × 30 × 2 = 4 ,800 

TRAIN rollouts. Meta-Harness evaluates the ini-tial harness once and one candidate in each of ten iterations, giving 11 × 30 × 2 = 660 rollouts. Har-nessFix performs three iterations; each evaluates the current harness and candidate on 30 tasks and rechecks at most two repairs on 20 tasks, giving 

3 × (2 × 30 + 2 × 20) = 300 rollouts. 

B.5 Artifact Release and Responsible Reporting 

The anonymized supplement includes our imple-mentation, configurations, prompts, split identifiers, and derived run metadata. Third-party agent source code, benchmark data, model weights, and full trajectories are not redistributed and should be ob-tained from their original releases. The benchmark dependencies are used under their respective licenses: MIT for τ -bench, Apache License 2.0 for Terminal-Bench, and CC BY-SA 4.0 for BIRD Mini-Dev. The agent software and model APIs remain subject to their respective li-censes and terms of use. 

AI Assistance Disclosure. The authors used general-purpose AI assistants for literature search, implementation support, and manuscript drafting and revision. The authors reviewed, edited, and verified all resulting code, citations, analyses, and prose, and remain responsible for the final paper. 

C Supporting Analyses 

C.1 OpenCode–BIRD Evolution Trace 

Figure 4 shows the accepted and rejected modifi-cations from an illustrative OpenCode–BIRD run. The first instruction edit produced no attributable improvement and was rejected. Four later edits 14 Method Internal split Trials/eval. Max. iterations Candidates/iter. Additional rule                        

> Self-Harness 20/10 220 3Released held-in/held-out proto-col Meta-Harness 30/0 210 1All TRAIN tasks used for vali-dation HarnessFix 20/10 131At most two modification retries HARNESS LENS 30 (targeted) 2––Total budget B= 200 units

Table 8: Configured evolution protocols. The internal split is carved from the same 30 TRAIN tasks; TEST is excluded from every evolution budget.                                

> Method Configured calculation Maximum
> Self-Harness 20 iterations ×4 evaluations ×30 tasks ×2 trials 4,800 Meta-Harness 11 evaluations ×30 tasks ×2 trials 660 HarnessFix 3 iterations ×[2 full evaluations ×30 tasks +2 repair rechecks ×20 tasks] 300 HARNESS LENS B= 200 total units, including 60 initial trials and all LLM sessions ≤200

Table 9: Configured TRAIN cost. H ARNESS LENS uses strictly fewer than 200 task rollouts. The displayed maxima compare auditable interaction budgets, not matched total compute costs. 

added deterministic tie handling, a conditional-aggregation pattern for two-entity differences, an output-column restriction, and native precision guidance. For each edit, both verification rounds supported the targeted improvement without an attributable regression, and the primary metric im-proved on the confirmation batch; the edit was therefore accumulated into the confirmed harness. The final skill candidate was not invoked during verification and produced no attributable change, so it was rejected. Because successive candidates use different modification-specific batches, their local verification rates should not be interpreted as a performance curve. The final harness improves held-out TEST pass@1 from 27/72 (37.50%) to 33/72 (45.83%), an 8.33 percentage-point increase. 

C.2 Decision-Level Analysis of the OpenCode Runs C.2.1 Scope 

This appendix examines the decisions within the four evolution runs that produce the OpenCode re-sults in Table 1: one run with B = 200 for each benchmark. Fixing the target harness to OpenCode follows the setting of Section 6.1 and avoids differ-ences in component inventory across harnesses. Table 10 lists the four runs. Three accepted at least one modification, and one returned H0. To-gether they contain 21 candidate iterations, 19 of which completed a paired verification comparison against the current confirmed harness. Evidence                     

> Benchmark Iter. Units H0Final
> Retail 6196 75.00 85.00 Banking 6197 20.90 25.37 BIRD 5197 37.50 45.83 Terminal 4181 33.90 33.90

Table 10: Summary of the four OpenCode evolution runs, one per benchmark. Iter. reports the number of candidate iterations, and Units reports the interaction-budget units consumed from the total budget of 200. H0

and Final report held-out TEST pass@1 (%) before and after evolution, respectively. The Terminal-Bench run accepted no modification and therefore returned H0.

about TEST outcomes comes from Tables 1 and 2, not from this analysis. 

C.2.2 Re-scoring the Recorded Decisions 

For every iteration, the controller recorded the can-didate and the current confirmed harness under identical tasks and trial conditions. We recom-pute the paired difference in verification TRAIN pass rate and ask which iterations a metric-only rule ( ∆ > 0 ⇒ accept) would decide differently from the attributable-evidence gate. Nothing is re-executed: both rules are applied to the same stored evidence, so the comparison is exact for these runs. The two rules differ on 7 of the 19 paired itera-tions (Figure 5): the metric-only rule would accept 10 modifications, whereas the attributable-evidence gate accepted 5. Six iterations improved the ver-ification pass rate but were not accepted. In the 15 Figure 4: Illustrative OpenCode–BIRD evolution trace. Four modifications with attributable improvements are accumulated, while two modifications without attributable evidence are rejected. The final harness improves held-out TEST pass@1 by 8.33 percentage points. 

largest disagreement, a candidate gained 50.0 per-centage points on its verification batch, but Trajec-tory Diagnosis found no task recovery attributable to a modified component. Conversely, one iteration advanced despite a 10.0-point verification-batch de-crease because it showed an attributable recovery of the targeted behavior with no attributable regres-sion; its final acceptance still required improvement on the confirmation batch. The Terminal run gives the clearest example of rejection: its only itera-tion with a positive paired difference gained 40.0 points without an attributable recovery, and the run therefore returned H0, as reported in Table 1. This re-scoring shows that the two rules select different modifications from the same within-run evidence; it does not show how the counterfac-tual metric-only harnesses would perform because those harnesses were not constructed in these runs. The separate Metric-Only Gate ablation in Table 2 provides the corresponding TEST result. 

C.2.3 Which Components Were Edited 

We identify the native component modified in each iteration from the workspace diff captured after the editor ran, rather than from the component proposed by Experience Analysis. The resulting record illustrates how task properties and compo-nent visibility shape iteration, although one run per benchmark does not support a rate estimate. Be-cause every run uses OpenCode, all four draw from the same component inventory; nevertheless, the components modified differ across benchmarks. In the BIRD run included in this decision-level analy-sis, all five iterations modify benchmark tool or pa-rameter descriptions, whereas the three completed Terminal edits modify general instructions. Re-tail and Banking edits center on skills, with fewer instruction and tool-description edits. General in-struction components are attempted most often but are seldom accepted in these runs, whereas skill and tool-schema edits do. 

C.2.4 Where the Budget Goes 

Aggregating the interaction-budget ledger de-scribed in Section A.1 for each run yields Figure 6. Initial and verification rollouts, behavior compari-son, and post-rollout Trajectory Diagnosis account for 82.2% of all units charged across the four runs and between 79.0% and 83.8% within individual runs. Context Exploration, proposal selection, and candidate editing account for the remainder. These values are direct sums from the budget ledger. This accounting makes the comparison in Table 9 conser-vative because H ARNESS LENS ’s 200-unit budget counts both task trials and LLM sessions, while the baseline figures count task rollouts only and 16 −30 −20 −10 0 10 20 30 40 50 

paired difference in screen pass@1 (candidate − parent, percentage points) 

promoted not promoted 

a metric-only rule promotes this side 

no attributed recovery attributed recovery, no regression identical paired di ff erence, opposite decision Figure 5: Candidate-minus-current-harness differences in TRAIN pass rate on matched tasks and trials for 19 completed initial-verification comparisons across four OpenCode runs. Rows indicate the attributable-evidence decisions, and the shaded region marks positive differences that a metric-only rule would accept. 0 50 100 150 200 

creation units charged 

Retail Banking BIRD Terminal   

> 84% 84% 82% 79%
> fixed 0baseline paired rollouts comparison and attribution candidate generation

Figure 6: Breakdown of interaction-budget consumption across the four OpenCode runs. Each stacked bar shows the units spent on the initial rollout, paired verification rollouts, comparison and attribution, and candidate gen-eration. Percentage labels give the combined share of the first three categories. 

exclude non-rollout LLM sessions. 17