Better, Faster, Stronger: Programmatic Skill
Learning Best Reduces Agent Cost
Zixi Huang∗†
Xiheng Wang∗
Andrew Wang∗†
William Jurayj
Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez
Daniel Khashabi†
Nicholas Andrews†
Johns Hopkins University
{zhuang60, awang116, danielk, noa}@jhu.edu
∗Equal contribution
†Corresponding authors
Abstract
Recently, the practice of augmenting LLM agent capability with skills has gained
prevalence. We explore the cost effective adaptation of agents to novel domains
by means of learning skills. Existing works focus on performance gain over cost
effectiveness. As a result, little is known about what skill learning strategies
save cost. We argue that among all the different skill learning methods, those
that view skills as programs can achieve the best cost reduction. By executing
sequences of actions deterministically, a program-augmented agent can reliably
and cheaply achieve goals that would otherwise require trial and error and risk
degenerate behavior over long horizons. An agent can learn at inference time by
incrementally discovering these programs and equipping them for future tasks. We
hypothesize that past trajectories contain enough signal to guide skill learning,
even without replay or validation, provided the agent can learn to analyze them. To
test our claims, we propose SpeedRunner, a coding agent that analyzes trajectories
and refactors skills for better performance on future tasks. Across three different
embodied environments, we show that SpeedRunner consistently achieves the
frontier in learning and cost reduction while remaining robust against distribution
shifts and environmental randomness.
1
Introduction
0.60
1.20
1.80
Cost per Trace ($)
10%
20%
30%
Performance
Crafter
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Cost per Trace ($)
40%
50%
60%
70%
ScienceWorld
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03
Cost per Trace ($)
60%
80%
100%
BabyAI
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 1: Performance vs average cost per trace for different approaches with GPT 5.4-mini on 3
benchmarks using learned programmatic skills. SpeedRunner consistently dominates baselines in
cost and performance, highlighting the potential advantages of programmatic skills.
Preprint.
arXiv:2608.11338v1  [cs.CL]  11 Aug 2026


As LLM agents become more prevalent, they are increasingly deployed in complex real world
environments. For instance, such agents now run a real world coffee shop in Stockholm.1 Such
deployments rarely present a fixed task distribution: new menu items and unfamiliar requests
accumulate over time, so a static policy degrades unless the agent can adapt on the job. In these
settings, we expect agents to learn online from their environment without catastrophically forgetting
their pre-existing knowledge. We view skill learning as a promising paradigm. Here an agent reflects
on its trajectories and updates its policy with environment-specific capabilities called skills (§2). The
manner in which the policy is updated, the representation of skills, and the degree of online vs offline
learning, vary between methods.
The predominant representation of skills are natural language descriptions (Zhong et al., 2026;
Mi et al., 2026; Ni et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026b; Yang et al., 2026), following the release of
Anthropic’s agent skills . However, this shift has overlooked a key consideration for the average
user: cost. Existing works focus on performance gains, with cost savings as an afterthought. Thus
the effect of different skill representation and learning strategies on cost remains unknown. We
argue that the modality of code can be a more cost effective way to represent skills, compared
to natural language. Rather than reasoning about the same routine over and over again, an agent
learns to offload that reasoning to a cheaper Turing machine. Hence, the more reasoning successfully
translated into code, the more cost saved.
However, the key question is how well agents can learn programmatic skills from experience, and
then successfully use them to accomplish tasks. Existing approaches fall short in multiple ways. First,
the prevailing method of learning from experience has been to prompt an LLM with past trajectories.
This method is critically bottlenecked by trajectory length; the number that fit in context decreases as
they grow longer, until none fit at all. Second, unrealistic assumptions are made to facilitate learning,
the most glaring of which assumes the ability to manipulate the environment to the extent of undoing
and rewinding states. This often manifests as a set of held-out episodes used to gather heuristics
for hillclimbing that are replayed repeatedly. Together, these shortcomings prevent the practical
deployment of programmatic skill learning, especially in multi-turn agentic settings.
We hypothesize that the agent trajectories themselves are signal rich, and that simply analyzing them
properly resolves these problems. At a high level, we frame the process of extracting signal as
an agentic coding task. Given a history of trajectories, an agent with access to a code execution
environment can programmatically identify recurring behavior patterns, skill usage and success
metrics, performance regression, among others. Unlike natural language feedback (Agrawal et al.,
2026; Pryzant et al., 2023) or handcrafted tools (Stengel-Eskin et al., 2024), a coding agent can
avoid needle-in-a-haystack retrieval over long trace histories, support more structured cross-trajectory
analysis, and mitigate the context-window bottleneck that arises in long-horizon environments with
200-step solutions (Hafner, 2022).
To test our hypothesis, we propose SpeedRunner, a simple yet effective way to induce programmatic
skills using coding agents to analyze observed trajectories. Our goal is to optimize a stochastic policy
parameterized by a library of skills, which, in practice, is an LLM agent equipped with a set of
callable functions. The search for optimal skills cycles between two phases. The stochastic policy
receives tasks and generates trajectories. Then, based on the trajectories, SpeedRunner updates the
skills.
We evaluate SpeedRunner on ScienceWorld (Wang et al., 2022), Crafter (Hafner, 2022), and BabyAI
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019)—a diverse set of embodied simulations. Each domain features vastly
different dynamics, physical constraints, and action spaces. Nevertheless, we find consistent trends
across all domains. (1) Programmatic skills can be learned online, without replay buffers or continual
validation. (2) Their primary advantage is cost reduction without compromising performance. (3)
Programmatic trajectory analysis enables skill induction for long-horizon agents. We also find that
programmatic skill learning can be robust to environmental randomness and to distribution shifts.
2
Preliminaries
Problem formulation. We assume a partially observed Markov decision process (POMDP) and a set
of valid initial states, where task instructions if available are part of the initial state. The POMDP we
1https://andonlabs.com/blog/ai-cafe-stockholm
2


𝜋L
Trajectories H
✨
🔧
API
Is travel_to_resources
working? 
Python 3.X.X
>>> 
for t in batch['traces']:
… for s in t.steps:
…    if s.fname =='travel_to_resource':
…    …
…        if s[‘status’]==‘not found’:
…            print(...)
train_0030 top-level not_found wood
train_0030 top-level not_found tree
train_0031 top-level not_found wood
train_0031 top-level not_found tree
train_0031 top-level not_found cow
train_0032 top-level not_found cow
How often is 
travel_to_resources
called? 
Python 3.X.X
>>> 
def parse_actions(trajectories):
… …
… return action_names
for batch in history:
… counts = Counter(name for t in 
batch['traces'] for name in parse_actions(t))
… print(... counts['travel_to_resource']))
batch 0 travel 0 
batch 1 travel 0 
batch 2 travel 63 
batch 3 travel 55
Sleep Phase
Repeat
Library Update
Actor
Inducer
Library
# (Rest of the library here)
-
+ def _bounded_exploration(max_actions: 
int = 32) -> dict[str, str]:
+    """Run a short deterministic 
exploration sweep and report the final 
state."""
…
+
for direction in directions:
+        result = act(direction)
…
+        visible = state.get("visible", 
"").lower()
+        if
re.search(r"(?:wood|tree|stone|coal|iron
|water|lake|cow|plant|sapling)@", 
visible):
+            seen_resource = True
+            break
+     return {"status": "resource_seen"
if seen_resource else "explored", ...}
Investigate trajectories + update library
Wake Phase
🤖
g(L, H)
Figure 2: Overview of SpeedRunner. A stochastic policy πL (the actor) is equipped with a skill
library L, while a proposal function g (the inducer) updates the library using trajectory history H.
During the wake phase, the actor generates a batch of trajectories. During the sleep phase, the inducer
examines the trajectories and edits the library. In this example, the inducer notices repeated “not
found” responses from travel_to_resource, checks the function’s usage frequency, and introduces
_bounded_exploration, which searches the actor’s local neighborhood for the desired resource.
refer to as the environment and the set of valid initial states as tasks (T ). Tasks are sampled one by
one for a stochastic policy π to complete. A rollout results in a sequence of observations and actions
ending in task reward (o1, a1, o2, a2, ..., oT , aT , R). We refer to this tuple as a trajectory (τ).
Pure Online-ness. In order to accommodate real world settings, we aim to require as little as possible
from the environment. Therefore, we do not assume the ability to undo and redo environment actions,
as many settings such as customer service or high frequency trading preclude such possibility. This
decision leaves us with “purely-online” learning, where tasks are ephemeral and cannot be played
again with an updated policy. All approaches and baselines we evaluate are made to conform to this
standard.
Defining skills. Prior works have treated skills as prompt strategies (Wang et al., 2025d), executable
functions (Stengel-Eskin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025c; Zheng et al., 2025), or a mixture of
both.2 We focus on executable functions because code is expressive, precise, reliably executed, and
structurally analyzable through call graphs and abstract syntax trees. We define a skill as an executable
function paired with documentation, operating on the atomic actions defined by the POMDP or other
existing skills. We refer to skill when we mean a function and its documentation, and function when
we mean the code alone.
3
SpeedRunner: Effective Trajectory Analysis With Coding Agents
We parameterize a stochastic policy by a skill library L, writing the resulting policy as πL. Learning
alternates between two phases. During the wake phase, the actor πL generates a batch of trajectories
B, which is appended to the history H. During the sleep phase, the inducer g : L × H →L edits
the library. In our experiments, the actor is an LLM agent equipped with callable skills, and the
inducer is a coding agent.
SpeedRunner focuses on the inducer: how should g extract learning signal from H? Trajectory-level
rewards are available but too sparse to reliably guide library edits from only a few online episodes.
Richer signal lies inside trajectories as environment responses: errors, unexpected outcomes, and other
feedback from the actor’s actions. These signals are unstructured and often buried in long-horizon
traces, making full-context reading expensive and summarization lossy.
Intuition. The solution is to make the inducer a coding agent. A coding agent has access to a
code execution environment and can add, edit, and delete library skills. If trajectories are persisted
to memory or disk, the inducer can inspect failures, aggregate statistics across episodes, and test
hypotheses about recurring patterns. This lets it analyze traces surgically without placing whole
2https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview
3


Algorithm 1 SpeedRunner: Wake–Sleep Skill Library Learning
Require: initial library L0, actor πL, inducer g : L × H →L, environment E, task distribution T ,
total episodes N, minibatch size k
1: H ←∅
2: L ←L0
3: for n = 1, . . . , N by k do
4:
▷wake phase
5:
sample tasks {x1, . . . , xk} ∼T
6:
for all xi ∈{x1, . . . , xk} do
7:
τi ∼πL(xi)
▷rollout in E starting from task xi
8:
end for
9:
B ←{τ1, . . . , τk}
10:
H ←H ∪{(B, L)}
▷tag trajectories with the generating library
11:
▷sleep phase
12:
L ←g(L, H)
▷inducer inspects trajectories and past libraries in H; diagnoses failures/re-
gressions; edits skills; sets public/private visibility
13: end for
14: return L
trajectories in context. Because the raw trajectories are still saved, this avoids the signal loss
introduced by summary-based compression.
Harness. The inducer acts as a programmer examining history and deciding what logic to implement.
It must understand the environment, diagnose failures, assign credit to skills, and check for regressions.
To support these analyses, we store both trajectories and past library versions. Each trajectory is
indexed by the L version that generated it (line 10 of Algorithm 1), allowing the inducer g to analyze
how functions evolve or regress over time. We also augment trajectories with call stacks for invoked
skills: when a skill expands into a sequence of primitive actions, we record those intermediate actions
and their outputs. These call stacks help diagnose silent skill failures.
Finally, we control library size. If the library grows without bound, the actor considers too many
functions in context and performance degrades (Wang et al., 2025a). We therefore introduce public
and private access modifiers. The inducer is instructed to make helper functions private and main
functions public; private functions remain callable by other skills but are hidden from the actor.
4
Experimental Setup
4.1
Baselines
We compare four methods that differ in how they accumulate experience—none, prose, or code—
while standardizing the primitive actions available to both the actor and inducer across all baselines.
ReAct This baseline serves as a control with no learning between episodes. The actor uses only the
benchmark’s atomic action interface and whatever context is available within the current episode (Yao
et al., 2023); it does not update any persistent strategy notes or reusable skills from past experience.
Online Prompt Optimization (OPO). We implement an online version of prompt optimization
methods such as Agrawal et al. (2026); Yuksekgonul et al. (2025). After each training batch, a
sleep-phase LLM reviews a concatenation of recent trajectories and updates the actor prompt.
ASI. Where supported, we also compare against Agent Skill Induction (ASI) (Wang et al., 2025c), a
recent code-based baseline that induces skills from successful trajectories. Unlike SpeedRunner, ASI
is append-only and verifies newly induced skills through replay-style checking on the inducing task
instance. To satisfy our no-replay constraint, we remove this verification step. Appendix E details
this adaptation, and Appendix G.3 reports an ablation of its effect.
Voyager. For Crafter, we additionally compare against Voyager (Wang et al., 2023), a code-based
lifelong-learning agent that learns through an automatic curriculum and an append-only executable
skill library. We evaluate Voyager only on Crafter because our online protocol removes the replay-
and-retry behavior available in Voyager’s original setting: once a rollout ends, the agent cannot reset
4


to the same state, preserve inventory or other environment progress, and retry the same attempted
skill. Under this constraint, Voyager’s curriculum is well defined only when the agent can continue
pursuing a relatively stable objective across rollouts.
Crafter satisfies this requirement. Although each rollout starts in a new world, the high-level objective
remains fixed: make progress in the survival environment. Voyager can therefore continue proposing
and refining intermediate exploration goals across rollouts without the target distribution changing
after every episode. ScienceWorld and BabyAI do not have this property. Their goals are externally
specified and vary from episode to episode, so Voyager’s curriculum would be optimizing against a
moving target. Evaluating Voyager on these benchmarks would require additional modification on
the benchmark itself, making the comparison less faithful to the original algorithm. We therefore
report Voyager only on Crafter, where a small adaptation is sufficient to fit our online setting; details
are provided in Appendix F.
4.2
Selected Benchmarks
We evaluate on three text-based embodied benchmarks—ScienceWorld, BabyAI, and Crafter. Each
defines its own physics, action space, and procedural demands, so success across all three is stronger
evidence of generality than success across benchmarks that share a single underlying medium (e.g.,
compute-use benchmarks where the primitives reduce to file and terminal operations regardless of the
task). We select subtasks where ReAct is neither trivial nor saturated, allowing us to isolate gains
from skill induction.
4.2.1
ScienceWorld
ScienceWorld (Wang et al., 2022) is a text-based interactive environment grounded in elementary
school science curricula with 10 task categories and 25 typed atomic actions (full list in Appendix B).
An episode succeeds when the simulator score reaches 1.0; partial scores are binarized to failure.
Since skill reuse happens within category, we evaluate one category at a time.
We choose
Electricity (task 3) and Classification (task 4) because they are (a) solvable but not satu-
rated by the out-of-the-box agent and (b) have enough tasks to measure learning over time.
4.2.2
BabyAI
BabyAI (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019) is a procedurally generated 2D grid-world for instruction
following under partial observability. We use the BabyAI-Text wrapper (Carta et al., 2023) as
integrated in BALROG (Paglieri et al., 2025), which surfaces text observations. The agent acts
through 6 primitives; episodes are scored as binary success.
Of BALROG’s 5 subtasks, we evaluate on pick_up_seq_go_to, which requires sequentially picking
up an object and navigating to a goal in the correct order. The ReAct baseline already saturates the
other four, leaving no headroom to measure gains from skill induction. We learn from 200 training
episodes (full details in Appendix C).
4.2.3
Crafter
Crafter (Hafner, 2022) is an open-ended survival benchmark inspired by Minecraft, where agents
gather resources, craft tools, and survive hazards in procedurally generated worlds. We expose 18
primitive actions and score each episode by the fraction of 22 predefined achievements unlocked
before death or the 2,000-action budget. Unlike the BALROG (Paglieri et al., 2025) text wrapper, we
expose full episode history and a richer textual view of the surroundings (full details in Appendix D).
4.3
Evaluation Setup
All experiments use gpt-5.4-mini for both the actor and inducer. Each run consists of 200 online
rollouts with a sleep cycle every 10 rollouts. We impose a 30-minute wall-clock limit on each
rollout to prevent nonterminating or pathologically long executions, such as loops inside generated
skills. When the limit is reached, the rollout is terminated and scored using the environment state at
termination; its token usage and partial task progress are retained in the reported metrics. All settings
are repeated across 3 random seeds; we report means and ±1 standard deviation across seed-level
5


0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
10%
20%
30%
Performance (
)
Crafter
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
40%
60%
ScienceWorld
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
60%
80%
100%
BabyAI
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
$0.00
$0.50
$1.00
$1.50
$2.00
Cost ($) (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
$0.01
$0.02
$0.03
$0.04
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
$0.01
$0.02
$0.03
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 3: Performance and output-token cost across Crafter, ScienceWorld, and BabyAI. Our method
and all baselines use GPT-5.4-mini as their backbone LLM. When the library overflows the model
context limit, as happened for ASI, OPO and Voyager in Crafter, the sleep phase produces no changes
and the process continues. SpeedRunner significantly outperforms all baselines (§4.1) across
benchmarks in terms of performance and cost except for OPO in ScienceWorld on performance,
per two-sided paired t-tests.
results to reflect run-to-run variability. A fixed held-out test set of 30 episodes per benchmark is
shared across all methods and checkpoints; evaluation is performed every 50 training rollouts. We
evaluate along two axes: task progression (benchmark-specific success or achievement rate) and
efficiency (output tokens per episode). Full implementation details are provided in Appendix A.
5
Results
Across all three benchmarks, SpeedRunner improves the performance–cost tradeoff of online skill
induction. The clearest and most consistent effect is efficiency: SpeedRunner substantially reduces
cost on every benchmark. Performance also improves, but less uniformly, suggesting that the value
of executable skill induction depends on how much reusable behavior the environment exposes. All
results below use GPT-5.4-mini, however, our cross-model experiments using Gemini-3-Flash and
Qwen-3.5-27B in Appendix G.2 reveal that our method’s performance–cost tradeoff improvements
hold in most settings.
Performance. SpeedRunner achieves the strongest final performance on all three benchmarks, with
the largest margins in domains where learned routines transfer reliably across episodes. On BabyAI,
SpeedRunner climbs from the ∼67% ReAct baseline to near-perfect performance, a regime no other
method reaches. On ScienceWorld, SpeedRunner ties OPO at the top and substantially outperforms
ASI. Crafter is the harder case (every method ends below 30% mean progression) but SpeedRunner
still leads. Appendix G.4 discusses why the magnitude of these gains varies with benchmark structure.
Efficiency. SpeedRunner is the only method whose cost decreases over training, and the reduction
holds across all three benchmarks — most dramatically on BabyAI, where final usage falls to roughly
an eighth of the ReAct baseline. This drop indicates that the library compresses repeated behavior into
callable routines: the actor invokes high-level skills rather than re-deriving primitive sequences. ASI
moves in the opposite direction on every benchmark, with cost growing as the library accumulates.
OPO stays close to the ReAct baseline on ScienceWorld and BabyAI but grows substantially on
Crafter, suggesting that prose memory cannot compress recurring patterns into reusable structure
when the environment is high-entropy.
6


0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
80%
100%
Performance (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
$0.01
$0.02
Cost ($) (
)
SpeedRunner
w/o Goal Prompt
w/o Private Functions
w/o Code Interpreter
Figure 4: Ablating SpeedRunner components on the BabyAI environment. Individual components
have only small effects on SpeedRunner’s performance, however, removing the code interpreter
degrades efficiency considerably.
6
Discussion
6.1
Ablation Study
We ablate three components of SpeedRunner on BabyAI: the goal-oriented inducer prompt, the
public/private function split, and the inducer’s code interpreter. The first ablation uses an ASI-style
prompt that abstracts observed behavior rather than directly optimizing task solution; the second
exposes all helper functions to the actor; the third replaces code-assisted trace analysis with in-context
trajectory inspection. Due to experiment cost, full ablations are limited to BabyAI. Further discussion
on the value of the code interpreter across environments can be found in Appendix G.1.
Figure 4 shows that all three ablations reduce performance, increase token usage, and introduce
instability. Removing the code interpreter has the largest efficiency cost, suggesting that programmatic
trace analysis is especially important for compression.
6.2
Code Complexity Analysis
6.2.1
Quantitative Analysis
We summarize the main quantitative findings here and defer the full structural statistics to Appendix H.
For each final codebook, we construct a directed call graph G = (V, E), where nodes are induced
functions and edges denote function calls. We focus on two call-graph measures in Table 1: maximum
depth and density. Maximum depth is the length of the longest directed path in G, measuring the
deepest abstraction chain in the library. Density is |E|/(|V |(|V | −1)), excluding self-edges, and
measures how often induced functions call one another rather than only primitive actions.
Deeper and denser call graphs.
Table 1 shows that SpeedRunner learns more structurally orga-
nized codebooks than the baselines. Across benchmark settings, SpeedRunner generally produces
deeper and denser call graphs than ASI. This indicates that its learned skills are not merely indepen-
dent wrappers around primitive actions, but are arranged into reusable hierarchical routines.
Reuse rather than accumulation.
The contrast is especially clear on Crafter, where all methods
are available. Voyager reaches maximum depth 5.7, but its density is only 0.0005, indicating little
reuse among induced functions. In comparison, SpeedRunner reaches greater maximum depth (8.7)
and much higher density (0.149). Thus, SpeedRunner does not improve by accumulating many
scenario-specific functions; it factors repeated behavior into shared abstractions that later skills can
call.
Overall, the quantitative signature of SpeedRunner is compositional organization: its functions call
one another more often and form deeper abstraction hierarchies.
7


Method
Crafter
ScienceWorld
BabyAI
Max d.
Density
Max d.
Density
Max d.
Density
ASI
1.7±0.6
0.030±0.008
1.7±0.3
0.016±0.004
1.0±0.0
0.018±0.005
SpeedRunner w/o CI
6.3±3.2
0.138±0.078
5.2±1.2
0.073±0.013
3.3±1.5
0.178±0.019
SpeedRunner (ours)
8.7±2.1
0.149±0.042
5.8±0.8
0.067±0.018
2.3±0.6
0.206±0.042
Voyager
5.7±2.1
0.0005±0.0003
–
–
–
–
Table 1: Main call-graph statistics for final skill libraries, using GPT-5.4-mini with mean±sd over
three seeds. The ScienceWorld column averages task 3 and task 4; reported means and standard
deviations are averaged across the two tasks. We report maximum call-graph depth (Max d.) and
call-graph density. SpeedRunner learns deeper and denser call graphs.
6.2.2
Qualitative Analysis
To understand where SpeedRunner’s gains come from, we now qualitatively compare our best-trial
libraries against those of our baselines and ablations. Two patterns recur across all four environments;
we summarize them here and defer per-environment evidence to Appendix I.
Code-enabled trace filtering. The inducer’s code interpreter lets it query specific slices of actor
trajectories before committing a function. In BabyAI, candidate mission parsers were executed against
historical mission strings to reveal that reversed-order phrasings (“go to X after you pick up Y”) invert
execution order—a failure mode that the ablation’s LLM-only inducer misses on 6.7% of episodes. In
Crafter, the inducer noticed a high rate of not_found returns from travel_to_visible_resource,
queried trace history to confirm the function was being called hundreds of times per batch while
still failing, and introduced _bounded_exploration to sweep the local neighborhood for the desired
resource before giving up. Without this loop, fixes accrue reactively one failure at a time.
Higher-level skills. The code interpreter enables abstractions that span high-level goals rather
than a single primitive, a category of function essentially unique to SpeedRunner. ASI and Voy-
ager produce primitives templated from individual traces (fixed motion sequences, per-resource
collectors), with no high level goal logic. In contrast, SpeedRunner generates functions such as
solve_sequential_mission (BabyAI), _find_visible_name_candidates (ScienceWorld), and
_choose_progress_target (Crafter), each encoding a complex decision hierarchy in one place.
The actor can often complete episodes with one or two high-level calls, explaining SpeedRunner’s
2–8× token reduction over ASI.
6.3
Effect of External Randomness (Crafter)
A central concern with code-based skill induction is that induced functions are deterministic by
construction and therefore potentially brittle to environmental noise: each function commits to a fixed
sequence of primitive actions, while real environments rarely repeat themselves exactly. We refer to
this as the external randomness gap. Crafter lets us isolate this factor by varying the zombie spawn
frequency — 0x (no zombies), 1x (standard), 2x (doubled) — while holding all other mechanics
fixed.
Figure 5 (bars) evaluates the robustness of all three methods to external randomness, measured against
the ReAct baseline. Prose memory (OPO) remains useful under low randomness, but collapses once
the environment becomes sufficiently stochastic. Append-only code (Voyager) shows a similar trend.
In contrast, only SpeedRunner improves over the baseline in every condition.
The %Combat overlay (Figure 5, dotted lines) characterizes the learned codebooks. As zombie
pressure increases, SpeedRunner does not simply expand its library; it reallocates representational
budget based on the noisy signal, becoming deeper and more combat-aware by revising existing
skills in place. This allows a single defensive abstraction to be amortized across the call graph.
Voyager, by contrast, repeatedly reintroduces the same combat logic as duplicated branches inside
newly generated, encounter-specific functions, without consolidating it into a general abstraction
(Appendix J gives the detailed per-condition structural breakdown and examples).
8


0x
1x
2x
Zombie spawn frequency
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Mean progression (End)
OPO
Voyager
SpeedRunner
ReAct
Voyager %Combat
SpeedRunner %Combat
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
%Combat
Figure 5: Crafter final performance vs %Combat, the fraction of induced functions whose body
references a creature/combat keyword under different zombie settings (GPT-5.4-mini, 200 training
rollouts).
0
100
200
300
400
# of Training Traces
20%
40%
60%
80%
Performance (
)
3 
 4
0
100
200
300
400
# of Training Traces
$0.02
$0.04
$0.06
Cost ($) (
)
3 
 4
ReAct
OPO
ASI
SpeedRunner
Figure 6: ScienceWorld distribution shift: performance (left) and cost (right) when switching from
task 3 to task 4 midway through training. SpeedRunner achieves the best performance and
strongest token compression across both tasks.
Together, these results suggest that SpeedRunner is better able to extract useful learning signal from
stochastic traces. Rather than treating external randomness as irreducible noise, it identifies recurring
failure modes and quickly incorporates the corresponding adaptations into reusable abstractions.
6.4
Adaptation under Distribution Shift (ScienceWorld)
Agents deployed in long-running environments must continually adapt to changing task distributions.
A central challenge is to acquire new capabilities while retaining previously acquired ones. We study
this setting by training on ScienceWorld task 3 (Electricity) for 200 rollouts before switching to
task 4 (Classification), carrying the library over unchanged (Figure 6; GPT-5.4-mini, three seeds).
At the distribution shift, all methods’ performance and cost approach ReAct’s behavior because the
two tasks require largely disjoint procedural knowledge. Throughout learning, SpeedRunner achieves
the best performance and strongest token compression on both tasks. By the end of task 4. it refines a
compact library of approximately 40 functions, compared to ASI which accumulates approximately
160 functions and plateaus at lower performance.
To evaluate knowledge retention, we re-evaluate task 3 after task 4 training. Despite actively revising
its library, SpeedRunner loses only 3.3 percentage points on task 3 while reducing inference cost by
27.1%, making it the only method that becomes more efficient on the original task after adapting to a
new distribution. In contrast, ASI improves task 3 performance by 4.4 percentage points but increases
inference cost by 40.6% because of its append-only nature: it preserves all learned knowledge, at
9


the cost of unbounded library growth. OPO loses 5.6 percentage points on task 3 while increasing
inference cost by 6.8%, performing worse than SpeedRunner in both retention and efficiency.
7
Related Work
Our work builds on the broader literature on continual learning (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Li & Hoiem,
2017; Wang et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2024) and self-evolving agents (Fang et al., 2025; ang Gao
et al., 2026), which aim to build agents that improve continuously through interaction with their
environment. Existing approaches broadly follow two lines: adapting the model’s weights (Qu et al.,
2025; Song et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025b) or augmenting a frozen model with externally stored
knowledge (Shinn et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2024). We study the latter, specifically
skill learning, which distills experience into reusable skills loaded into context to help complete a
task. Prior skill-learning methods primarily aim to improve task performance and adaptation, while
treating inference cost as a secondary outcome. We instead study skill learning through the lens of
inference efficiency, where the central design choice is how skills are represented.
Most methods represent skills in natural language. A line of work distills trajectories into reusable
natural-language skill documents temporarily loaded into context when relevant (Zhao et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2025d; Ma et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026a; Liu et al., 2026; Ni et al., 2026; Alzubi et al.,
2026). Some methods adopt skill folders which bundle textual instructions and helper scripts (Liu
et al., 2026; Alzubi et al., 2026), but the primary optimization target remains the natural-language
artifact. While natural-language skills are flexible and generalize well, the agent must reread and
re-follow the instructions on every reuse, so recurring procedures keep incurring inference cost.
The second line of work represents reusable skills as executable code. Foundational works used
Bayesian program induction to synthesize formal representations through bottom-up composition of
primitives (Ellis et al., 2018, 2021). Recent work extends this paradigm to LLM agents: Voyager
grows a skill library through open-ended Minecraft exploration (Wang et al., 2023), while a wave of
systems induce and refine skills from agent trajectories (Stengel-Eskin et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025c;
Zheng et al., 2025; Qiu et al., 2026). Programmatic skills replace repeated reasoning with delegated
computation and thus provide a more efficient representation for recurring procedures. However,
previous work primarily studies programmatic skills to improve agent capability. Many methods
further rely on experience replay for validating candidate skills to guard against regression, yet these
assumptions are difficult to satisfy in deployed environments where interactions are irreversible.
Our work similarly represents skills as executable code but differs in both objective and methodology.
Rather than treating programmatic skills primarily as a means of improving capability, we highlight
their capacity to minimize inference cost by maximizing reusable computation. We further show that
such skills can be induced entirely online without replay by keeping the accumulated trajectories
available as a growing dataset for programmatic analysis, enabling continual refinement of the skill
library while mitigating regression.
8
Conclusion
In this work, we demonstrate that representing skills as code can achieve the best cost effectiveness
while retaining performance. We observe that this trend is remarkably consistent across distribution
shifts, randomness, different domains, and even different models. We further demonstrate that this
trend exists in a purely-online setting, without a held-out set of episodes to evaluate skill update
quality for hillclimbing. Not all programmatic skill learning approaches reduce cost to the same
extent. We are only able to do so by framing the process of extracting signal from past trajectories as
an agentic coding task.
Limitations We were unable to benchmark flagship models due to cost limitations. For the same
reason, we were unable to evaluate on more expensive benchmarks such as SWE-Bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) or Terminal-Bench (Merrill et al., 2026). Nevertheless, we believe that the diversity and
controllability of our evaluations are sufficient to support our general conclusions. Skill learning
at test time suffers from instability, as demonstrated by the large error bars across all methods we
evaluated; stabilizing online skill induction remains an open problem. Lastly, we do not study
meta-learning of the inducer itself—in principle, the inducer could learn to perform better analyses
over time, but we leave this to future work.
10


References
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong,
Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik
Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. Gepa:
Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2507.19457.
Salaheddin Alzubi, Noah Provenzano, Jaydon Bingham, Weiyuan Chen, and Tu Vu. Evoskill:
Automated skill discovery for multi-agent systems, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.
02766.
Huan ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong
Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, Hongru Wang, Han Xiao, Yuhang Zhou, Shaokun Zhang,
Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Yixiong Fang, Qiwen Zhao, Dongrui Liu, Qihan Ren, Cheng Qian,
Zhenhailong Wang, Minda Hu, Huazheng Wang, Qingyun Wu, Heng Ji, and Mengdi Wang. A
survey of self-evolving agents: What, when, how, and where to evolve on the path to artificial
super intelligence, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.21046.
Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves
Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23.
JMLR.org, 2023.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. BabyAI: First steps towards grounded language learning
with a human in the loop. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJeXCo0cYX.
Kevin Ellis, Lucas Morales, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenen-
baum.
Library learning for neurally-guided Bayesian program induction.
In Proceedings
of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18,
pp. 7816–7826, Red Hook, NY, USA, December 2018. Curran Associates Inc. URL https:
//dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3327757.3327878.
Kevin Ellis, Catherine Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias Sablé-Meyer, Lucas Morales, Luke Hewitt, Luc
Cary, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. DreamCoder: bootstrapping inductive
program synthesis with wake-sleep library learning. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN
International Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 2021,
pp. 835–850, New York, NY, USA, June 2021. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
978-1-4503-8391-2. doi: 10.1145/3453483.3454080. URL https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/
3453483.3454080.
Jinyuan Fang, Yanwen Peng, Xi Zhang, Yingxu Wang, Xinhao Yi, Guibin Zhang, Yi Xu, Bin Wu,
Siwei Liu, Zihao Li, Zhaochun Ren, Nikos Aletras, Xi Wang, Han Zhou, and Zaiqiao Meng. A
comprehensive survey of self-evolving ai agents: A new paradigm bridging foundation models and
lifelong agentic systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.07407.
Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=1W0z96MFEoH.
Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R
Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=VTF8yNQM66.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A.
Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis,
Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, March
2017. ISSN 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1611835114.
11


Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1606.09282.
Xingyan Liu, Xiyue Luo, Linyu Li, Ganghong Huang, Jianfeng Liu, and Honglin Qiao. Skillforge:
Forging domain-specific, self-evolving agent skills in cloud technical support, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2604.08618.
Ziyu Ma, Shidong Yang, Yuxiang Ji, Xucong Wang, Yong Wang, Yiming Hu, Tongwen Huang, and
Xiangxiang Chu. SkillClaw: Let Skills Evolve Collectively with Agentic Evolver, April 2026.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2604.08377. arXiv:2604.08377 [cs].
Mike A Merrill, Alexander Glenn Shaw, Nicholas Carlini, Boxuan Li, Harsh Raj, Ivan Bercovich, Lin
Shi, Jeong Yeon Shin, Thomas Walshe, E. Kelly Buchanan, Junhong Shen, Guanghao Ye, Haowei
Lin, Jason Poulos, Maoyu Wang, Marianna Nezhurina, Di Lu, Orfeas Menis Mastromichalakis,
Zhiwei Xu, Zizhao Chen, Yue Liu, Robert Zhang, Leon Liangyu Chen, Anurag Kashyap, Jan-Lucas
Uslu, Jeffrey Li, Jianbo Wu, Minghao Yan, Song Bian, Vedang Sharma, Ke Sun, Steven Dillmann,
Akshay Anand, Andrew Lanpouthakoun, Bardia Koopah, Changran Hu, Etash Kumar Guha,
Gabriel H. S. Dreiman, Jiacheng Zhu, Karl Krauth, Li Zhong, Niklas Muennighoff, Robert Kwesi
Amanfu, Shangyin Tan, Shreyas Pimpalgaonkar, Tushar Aggarwal, Xiangning Lin, Xin Lan,
Xuandong Zhao, Yiqing Liang, Yuanli Wang, Zilong Wang, Changzhi Zhou, David Heineman,
Hange Liu, Harsh Trivedi, John Yang, Junhong Lin, Manish Shetty, Michael Yang, Nabil Omi,
Negin Raoof, Shanda Li, Terry Yue Zhuo, Wuwei Lin, Yiwei Dai, Yuxin Wang, Wenhao Chai,
Shang Zhou, Dariush Wahdany, Ziyu She, Jiaming Hu, Zhikang Dong, Yuxuan Zhu, Sasha
Cui, Ahson Saiyed, Arinbjörn Kolbeinsson, Christopher Michael Rytting, Ryan Marten, Yixin
Wang, Jenia Jitsev, Alex Dimakis, Andy Konwinski, and Ludwig Schmidt. Terminal-bench:
Benchmarking agents on hard, realistic tasks in command line interfaces. In The Fourteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=a7Qa4CcHak.
Qirui Mi, Zhijian Ma, Mengyue Yang, Haoxuan Li, Yisen Wang, Haifeng Zhang, and Jun Wang.
Skill-pro: Learning reusable skills from experience via non-parametric PPO for LLM agents. In
Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026. URL https://openreview.
net/forum?id=9kJQjx2B80.
Jingwei Ni, Yihao Liu, Xinpeng Liu, Yutao Sun, Mengyu Zhou, Pengyu Cheng, Dexin Wang,
Erchao Zhao, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. Trace2skill: Distill trajectory-local lessons into
transferable agent skills, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.25158.
Davide Paglieri, Bartłomiej Cupiał, Samuel Coward, Ulyana Piterbarg, Maciej Wolczyk, Akbir Khan,
Eduardo Pignatelli, Łukasz Kuci´nski, Lerrel Pinto, Rob Fergus, Jakob Nicolaus Foerster, Jack
Parker-Holder, and Tim Rocktäschel. BALROG: Benchmarking agentic LLM and VLM reasoning
on games. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=fp6t3F669F.
Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt
optimization with "gradient descent" and beam search, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.03495.
Libin Qiu, Zhirong Gao, Junfu Chen, Yuhang Ye, Weizhi Huang, Xiaobo Xue, Wenkai Qiu, and Shuo
Tang. Autorefine: From trajectories to reusable expertise for continual llm agent refinement, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22758.
Yuxiao Qu, Anikait Singh, Yoonho Lee, Amrith Setlur, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Chelsea Finn, and
Aviral Kumar. Rlad: Training llms to discover abstractions for solving reasoning problems, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.02263.
Haizhou Shi, Zihao Xu, Hengyi Wang, Weiyi Qin, Wenyuan Wang, Yibin Wang, Zifeng Wang, Sayna
Ebrahimi, and Hao Wang. Continual learning of large language models: A comprehensive survey,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16789.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366.
12


Yifan Song, Da Yin, Xiang Yue, Jie Huang, Sujian Li, and Bill Yuchen Lin. Trial and error:
Exploration-based trajectory optimization for llm agents, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2403.02502.
Elias Stengel-Eskin, Archiki Prasad, and Mohit Bansal.
ReGAL: Refactoring Programs to
Discover Generalizable Abstractions, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.16467.
arXiv:2401.16467 [cs].
Andrew Wang, Sophia Hager, Adi Asija, Daniel Khashabi, and Nicholas Andrews. Hell or high
water: Evaluating agentic recovery from external failures. In Second Conference on Language
Modeling, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Zk224WPT42.
Chenxi Wang, Zhuoyun Yu, Xin Xie, Wuguannan Yao, Runnan Fang, Shuofei Qiao, Kexin Cao,
Guozhou Zheng, Xiang Qi, Peng Zhang, and Shumin Deng. Skillx: Automatically constructing
skill knowledge bases for agents, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.04804.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language
Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, November 2023. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ehfRiF0R3a.
Hao Wang, Guozhi Wang, Han Xiao, Yufeng Zhou, Yue Pan, Jichao Wang, Ke Xu, Yafei Wen, Xiaohu
Ruan, Xiaoxin Chen, and Honggang Qi. Skill-sd: Skill-conditioned self-distillation for multi-turn
llm agents, 2026b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.10674.
Liyuan Wang, Xingxing Zhang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. A comprehensive survey of continual learning:
Theory, method and application, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.00487.
Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. ScienceWorld: Is
your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and Yue Zhang (eds.),
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp.
11279–11298, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-main.775. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
emnlp-main.775/.
Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin,
Kefan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho, Jiajun Wu,
Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. Ragen: Understanding self-evolution in
llm agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
20073.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neubig, and Daniel Fried. Inducing programmatic skills
for agentic tasks, 2025c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.06821.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. Agent Workflow Memory. June
2025d. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=NTAhi2JEEE.
Yutao Yang, Junsong Li, Qianjun Pan, Bihao Zhan, Yuxuan Cai, Lin Du, Jie Zhou, Kai Chen, Qin
Chen, Xin Li, Bo Zhang, and Liang He. Autoskill: Experience-driven lifelong learning via skill
self-evolution, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01145.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_
vluYUL-X.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Pan Lu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin,
and James Zou. Optimizing generative ai by backpropagating language model feedback. Nature,
639:609–616, 2025.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. Expel: Llm
agents are experiential learners, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.10144.
13


Boyuan Zheng, Michael Y. Fatemi, Xiaolong Jin, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Yueqi Song,
Yu Gu, Jayanth Srinivasa, Gaowen Liu, Graham Neubig, and Yu Su. Skillweaver: Web agents
can self-improve by discovering and honing skills, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
07079.
Shanshan Zhong, Yi Lu, Jingjie Ning, Yibing Wan, Lihan Feng, Yuyi Ao, Leonardo F. R. Ribeiro,
Markus Dreyer, Sean Ammirati, and Chenyan Xiong. Skilllearnbench: Benchmarking continual
learning methods for agent skill generation on real-world tasks, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2604.20087.
A
Implementation Details
A.1
Models and Decoding
All results in the main paper use gpt-5.4-mini as the underlying LLM for every role. Decoding
settings differ by role:
• Actor agent: reasoning_effort = low, parallel_tool_calls = false, request limit
100 per episode.
• Inducer agent: reasoning_effort = medium, parallel_tool_calls = false, request
limit 100 per episode.
Libraries are reset to empty at the start of training for each task family; only the primitives carry over.
During the sleep cycle, the inducer is allowed to add, edit, or remove library entries between sleep
cycles.
A.2
Training and Evaluation Schedule
Each training run consists of 200 online rollouts. The inducer is invoked every 10 rollouts (one
sleep cycle per 10 training episodes), and the resulting library is evaluated on the 30-episode test
set every 50 training rollouts, giving five evaluation checkpoints per run (zero-shot at rollout 0, plus
rollouts 50, 100, 150, 200). Each setting is repeated over 3 random seeds. At each checkpoint, we
first compute each seed-level metric over the 30 test episodes, then report the mean and ±1, s.d.
across the three seed-level values.
A.3
Cost Accounting
Per-episode inference cost is computed as
cost = pinN uncached
in
+ pcacheN cached
in
+ poutNout,
where N uncached
in
, N cached
in
, and Nout are the uncached input, cached input, and output tokens summed
over all LLM calls in the episode. This includes actor calls during rollout and sleep-time inducer
calls amortized over the rollouts in the corresponding inducer batch. We use the published API prices
as of May 6, 2026. For gpt-5.4-mini, we set
pin = $0.75,
pcache = $0.075,
pout = $4.50
per million tokens.
For gemini-3-flash-preview, we set
pin = $0.35,
pcache = $0.0875,
pout = $1.05
per million tokens.
We use this dollar-cost accounting in Figure 3.
B
ScienceWorld Details
B.1
Chosen Tasks
We evaluate on two ScienceWorld task families: Electricity (family 3) and Classification
(family 4). Each family contains multiple task names (sub-tasks); episodes are addressed by
14


(task_name, variation_idx) pairs. We use ScienceWorld’s built-in train/dev/test variation parti-
tions (get_variations_train/dev/test), which are disjoint by construction. For each family we
sample 200 train variations and 30 test variations with a fixed seed (42); the same train/test sets are
reused across all three training seeds, so only the rollout stochasticity differs across runs.
B.2
Action Interface
The agent acts through a fixed set of 25 primitive Python functions that wrap ScienceWorld’s
text parser.
These primitives cover navigation (go, look_around, look_at, look_in), object
manipulation (pick_up, put_down, move, pour, dunk), state changes (open, close, activate,
deactivate, connect, disconnect, mix), measurement and inspection (focus_on, read, use,
inventory, task_description), and auxiliary actions (eat, flush, wait, disambiguate). Each
primitive takes typed string arguments (e.g. connect(obj_a, obj_b)); this is the interface the
induced library composes against. We do not expose ScienceWorld’s get_valid_actions list to
the agent. In our setting, the agent’s effective action space includes both primitives and any library
functions available under the current method; surfacing only the primitive-level valid-action set would
be misleading, since it omits the higher-level abstractions the agent is expected to prefer.
B.3
Observations and Episode Termination
Observations are plain text: on each step the agent receives the room description and the parser’s
acknowledgement of the previous action.
The full observation history is kept in context (no
sliding window). The initial prompt contains the task description returned by ScienceWorld’s
taskdescription() and the opening room observation; no oracle hints or gold trajectories are
provided.
An episode ends when (i) the actor agent calls the submit_answer tool to declare the task complete,
or (ii) the actor agent exceeds its budget of 100 LLM calls per episode. We set this budget at 100
because additional tool calls no longer meaningfully improve the agent’s success rate, so further
extending the budget would inflate cost without changing the headline results. In both cases, success
is determined by checking ScienceWorld’s internal score: the episode is scored as a success iff the
score has reached its maximum value of 1.0, and as a failure otherwise.
C
BabyAI Details
C.1
Chosen Tasks
We evaluate on the pick_up_seq_go_to subtask of BabyAI-Text as exposed by BALROG. Episodes
are addressed by environment seed. We sample 200 train seeds and 30 test seeds with a fixed top-level
seed (42); train and test seed sets are disjoint by construction. The same train/test sets are reused
across all three training seeds, so only the rollout stochasticity differs across runs.
C.2
Action Interface
The agent acts through a fixed set of 6 primitive Python functions that wrap BabyAI-Text’s command
interface: navigation (turn_left, turn_right, go_forward), object manipulation (pick_up, drop),
and state change (toggle). Each primitive takes no arguments and operates on the cell directly in
front of the agent; this is the interface the induced library composes against. We do not expose
BALROG’s valid-action list to the agent. In our setting, the agent’s effective action space includes
both primitives and any library functions available under the current method; surfacing only the
primitive-level valid-action set would be misleading, since it omits the higher-level abstractions the
agent is expected to prefer.
C.3
Observations and Episode Termination
Observations are plain text descriptions of the agent’s egocentric view, as produced by the BabyAI-
Text wrapper. The full observation history is kept in context (no sliding window). The initial prompt
contains the synthetic natural-language instruction sampled by BabyAI’s Baby Language grammar
and the opening observation.
15


An episode ends when (i) the simulator emits a terminal signal indicating the instruction has been
satisfied, or (ii) the actor agent exceeds its budget of 30 LLM calls per episode. We set this budget at
30 because additional tool calls no longer meaningfully improve the agent’s success rate, so further
extending the budget would inflate cost without changing the headline results. Like ScienceWorld,
success is determined entirely by the environment’s binary task-completion signal: the episode is
scored as a success if the instruction is fully satisfied within the budget, and as a failure otherwise.
D
Crafter Details
D.1
Episode Sampling
Each Crafter episode is a freshly generated world keyed by a single integer seed. We use three
independent runs, each with 200 training worlds and 30 test worlds, but with different top-level
seeds to ensure diversity. All methods are run three times using the same training and test worlds, so
comparisons are matched by world seed. Unless stated otherwise, reported means and uncertainty
bands are computed over these three matched runs.
D.2
Action Interface
The agent acts through a fixed set of 18 primitive Python functions wrapping the Crafter engine: 17 are
game-advancing primitives and one is a non-advancing read action. These primitives cover navigation
(move_north, move_south, move_east, move_west), interaction (do – a multi-use action that col-
lects material, drinks from a lake, or hits the creature in front; sleep; noop – advance one tick without
acting), structure placement (place_stone, place_table, place_furnace, place_plant), and tool
crafting (make_wood_pickaxe, make_stone_pickaxe, make_iron_pickaxe, make_wood_sword,
make_stone_sword, make_iron_sword). All 17 game-advancing primitives are zero-argument and
return None; each advances the Crafter world by exactly one tick. The get_current_observation()
primitive returns the current textual observation without advancing the world, and is provided so that
library functions can re-inspect the world between primitive calls. Crafter also has no submit_answer
action; episodes terminate only through the environment itself (see below).
D.3
Observations
Observations are plain text rendered from the agent’s egocentric 9 × 9 local view, with three blocks
shown each step: vital status, inventory contents, and visible objects (with the object directly in front
of the agent reported separately). Each observation is wrapped between «OBSERVATION_BEGIN» and
«OBSERVATION_END» delimiters and substituted once into the {obs} slot of the user prompt template
at the start of the rollout. It will also be returned upon agent calling the get_current_observation()
primitive.
A representative mid-episode observation looks as follows:
<<OBSERVATION_BEGIN>>
Your
s t a t u s :
−h e a l t h :
7/9
−food :
5/9
−drink :
6/9
−energy :
8/9
Your
i n v e n t o r y :
−wood :
3
−stone :
1
−wood_pickaxe :
1
You see :
−g r a s s
1
s t e p
north
−t r e e
2
s t e p s
north
and 1
s t e p
e a s t
−stone 3
s t e p s
e a s t
−zombie 4
s t e p s
north
and 2
s t e p s
west
−water 5
s t e p s
south
and 3
s t e p s
e a s t
You face
g r a s s
a t
your
f r o n t .
<<OBSERVATION_END>>
16


When the agent’s inventory is empty, the inventory block collapses to the line “You have nothing in
your inventory.”; when nothing other than the player is visible in the 9×9 window, the visible-objects
block collapses to “You see nothing away from you.” Sleeping or dead states are surfaced by prefixing
the status block with a single sentence (e.g., “You are sleeping, and will not be able to take actions
until energy is full.”).
D.4
Episode Termination
An episode ends when (i) the player’s health reaches zero, or (ii) the agent exhausts its budget of
2,000 primitive actions. Each episode is scored as the fraction of the 22 achievements unlocked at
termination. The actor agent’s per-episode LLM-call budget (request_limit) is also set to 2,000 to
ensure that code baselines are not disadvantaged by being cut off early.. In practice, we rarely see any
rollout exceeding this budget.
D.5
Achievements
The agent is told about the 22 Crafter achievements in the initial system prompt, in a fixed display
order: Collect Wood, Place Table, Eat Cow, Collect Sapling, Collect Drink, Make Wood Pickaxe,
Make Wood Sword, Place Plant, Defeat Zombie, Collect Stone, Place Stone, Eat Plant, Defeat
Skeleton, Make Stone Pickaxe, Make Stone Sword, Wake Up, Place Furnace, Collect Coal, Collect
Iron, Make Iron Pickaxe, Make Iron Sword, Collect Diamond.
D.6
Zombie-Frequency Variants
The external-randomness analysis in §6.3 sweeps a single environment knob, zombie_frequency
(f), while holding all other settings fixed. The knob enters the upstream Crafter engine in two places.
First, at world reset: when f = 0, every zombie generated by terrain initialization is explicitly
removed before the first step. Second, at every tick during world balancing: zombies spawn with
probability min(1.0, 0.3f) and despawn with probability min(1.0, 0.4f) per eligible chunk, and
the per-chunk target population is scaled by f. With this scaling, f = 1.0 recovers the upstream
Crafter defaults, f = 0.0 removes zombies entirely, and f = 2.0 doubles both spawn and despawn
pressures (each clipped at 1.0) and doubles the target population. No other engine parameters are
changed across variants.
For the external randomness experiments, we instantiate this knob at three levels labeled 0x (f = 0.0),
1x (f = 1.0, default), and 2x (f = 2.0), and run each of the three comparison methods at each level:
OPO, Voyager, and SpeedRunner. For a given method, the 1x configuration is the same as the one
used in the main results; therefore we directly reused the results from the main experiments; the 0x
and 2x configurations differ only in zombie_frequency.
E
ASI Adaptation Details
We adapt ASI (Wang et al., 2025c) to our purly-online setting while preserving its programmatic
skill induction mechanism. In the original algorithm, each newly induced skill undergoes a skill
verification step, in which the agent attempts to re-solve the inducing task using the new skill and
retains the skill only if verification succeeds. Because this step requires additional task interaction
beyond the original online trajectory, we remove it to satisfy our no-replay constraint. All other
components of ASI are left unchanged.
F
Voyager Adaptation Details
Given its relevance to our work, we make three task-level adaptations to preserve Voyager’s (Wang
et al., 2023) core ingredients while aligning its training protocol with our online constraints. First, the
curriculum agent is informed about the Crafter’s 22 achievements as the final optimization target when
proposing the next intermediate subgoals. Second, we remove Voyager’s respawn-style continuation
after death: when the agent dies or the episode terminates, training restarts from a fresh Crafter world
with no inventory carryover, matching the irreversible online setting used by all other methods. Third,
17


0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Performance (
)
Crafter
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
40%
60%
ScienceWorld
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
70%
80%
90%
100%
BabyAI
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
2k
4k
6k
8k
Output Tokens (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.4k
0.8k
1.2k
1.6k
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.4k
0.8k
1.2k
1.6k
SpeedRunner
w/o Goal Prompt
w/o Private Functions
w/o Code Interpreter
Figure 7: Extra SpeedRunner ablations on the Crafter and ScienceWorld environments. As in
BabyAI, removing access to the code interpreter has only small effects on performance but contributes
substantially to improvements in efficiency.
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
10%
20%
30%
Performance (
)
Crafter
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
40%
60%
ScienceWorld
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
60%
80%
100%
BabyAI
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
4k
8k
12k
Output Tokens (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.4k
0.8k
1.2k
1.6k
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
1k
2k
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 8: Main results using GPT-5.4-mini with tokens instead of cost for easy comparison across
models.
evaluation is performed through the same rollout interface used by the other baselines, so that learned
skills are assessed under the same acting protocol rather than through a bespoke execution regime.
G
Additional Main Results
G.1
Code Interpreter Ablations
Our results in Figure 7 show that removing the code interpreter degrades final performance in two out
of three environments and increases the amount of output tokens required substantially in all three.
This demonstrates the importance of this component for SpeedRunner’s gains in performance and
especially efficiency for programmatic skill induction.
18


0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
10%
20%
30%
40%
Performance (
)
Crafter
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
60%
80%
100%
ScienceWorld
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
40%
60%
80%
100%
BabyAI
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
2k
4k
6k
Output Tokens (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.2k
0.4k
0.6k
0.8k
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.2k
0.4k
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 9: Gemini-3-Flash performance and output-token cost across Crafter, ScienceWorld, and
BabyAI. As with GPT-5.4-mini, SpeedRunner reduces output tokens across the board, however,
performance improvements are much less consistent than with GPT-5.4-mini.
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
10%
20%
30%
40%
Performance (
)
Crafter
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
40%
60%
80%
ScienceWorld
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
BabyAI
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
4k
8k
12k
16k
Output Tokens (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
1k
2k
3k
4k
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
1k
2k
3k
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 10: Qwen-3.5-27B performance and output-token cost across Crafter, ScienceWorld, and
BabyAI. As with GPT-5.4-mini and Gemini-3-Flash, SpeedRunner generally matches or improves
final task performance while reducing output tokens.
G.2
Cross-Model Results
In order to test whether SpeedRunner’s trends depend on the backbone LLM, we repeat the main
comparison with Gemini-3-Flash and Qwen-3.5-27B. As shown in Figures 9 and 10, SpeedRunner
retains the best output-token efficiency across the board and the best performance–efficiency tradeoff
in most instances. More specifically, using the same two-sided pair t-test from our main results,
we find that our method is significantly more efficient and better performing than our code-based
baselines in all settings with every models except for Crafter, where they are much more competitive.
Additionally, our method’s performance against OPO, our non-code baseline, reveals an interesting
pattern. SpeedRunner achieves significantly worse final success rate than OPO with Qwen in
ScienceWorld and Gemini in all benchmarks, despite achieving much lower token usage. We highlight
this result because it shows that aggressive code delegation is not always performance-improving
when the base actor is already strong. Not all performance can be transferred into code.
In an attempt to understand this behavior, we note that both Gemini-3-Flash and Qwen-3.5-27B start
from higher performance levels than GPT-5.4-mini in all benchmarks where OPO beats SpeedRunner,
19


2k
4k
6k
8k
10k
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Performance
Crafter
0.4k
0.8k
1.2k
40%
50%
60%
70%
ScienceWorld
1k
2k
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
BabyAI
2k
4k
6k
25%
30%
35%
Performance
0.2k
0.4k
70%
80%
90%
0.2k
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
4k
8k
12k
Output Tokens per Trace
20%
23%
25%
28%
30%
Performance
2k
3k
Output Tokens per Trace
40%
60%
80%
1k
2k
3k
Output Tokens per Trace
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
ReAct
OPO
ASI
Voyager
SpeedRunner
Figure 11:
Performance vs output tokens per trace for all approaches and benchmarks for GPT-
5.4-mini (top), Gemini-3-Flash (middle) and Qwen-3.5-27B (bottom) for easy comparison. This
figure demonstrates that SpeedRunner dominates in most settings or remains at the frontier in all
experiments we conducted.
indicating stronger raw model capacity in these environments. We believe this behavior is driven by
compression aggressiveness. SpeedRunner ’s iterative induction produces hierarchical libraries that
delegate a large fraction of decisions to code; in Crafter, for example, Gemini-3-Flash reduces LLM
calls by 94% over training. This yields very low inference cost, but it can also make the policy too
rigid in stochastic environment. Code induced from earlier trajectories may encode procedures that
are efficient on average but less able to adapt to later situations requiring reactive judgment. Thus,
these results expose a real tradeoff: SpeedRunner can over-compress a capable actor, improving cost
while sacrificing some performance.
Nevertheless, as illustrated in Figure 11, our approach succeeds in consistent learning and efficiency
performance. Of the 9 settings, our approach dominates in 5 and is on the frontier in the remainder, a
feat that is unmatched by any of the other baselines.
G.3
Offline Continual Learning with ASI
We further study the effect of experience replay by comparing our online adaptation and the original
offline version of ASI. As described in Appendix E , the original algorithm verifies each new skill by
re-executing the inducing task, whereas our online adaptation removes this step.
Figure 12 compare ASI, ASI (replay), and SpeedRunner on ScienceWorld task 3. Restoring the
verification step improves ASI’s mean task performance, particularly early in training,because it
filters out broken skills that lead to regression on a previous task. However, it does not reduce token
cost beyond the adapted online version. After 200 training traces, SpeedRunner achieves higher
mean task performance than both ASI variants while using substantially fewer output tokens per
episode (approximately 65% fewer than both ASI variants). These results indicate that removing
ASI’s replay-based verification step makes continual skill induction more challenging.
20


0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
20%
40%
60%
Performance (
)
0
50
100
150
200
# of Training Traces
0.4k
0.8k
1.2k
1.6k
2k
Output Tokens (
)
ASI
ASI (replay)
SpeedRunner
Figure 12: Effect of ASI’s replay-based skill verification on ScienceWorld task 3. Restoring replay-
based verification improves ASI’s task performance, particularly early in training.SpeedRunner
achieves the highest final performance while using substantially fewer output tokens than both ASI
variants.
G.4
Why Performance Gains Vary by Benchmark
SpeedRunner’s main advantage comes from converting repeated behavior into compact executable
routines, and the value of this conversion depends on the structure of the environment. ScienceWorld
and BabyAI contain many reusable procedures that can be invoked repeatedly once discovered,
so SpeedRunner improves performance while dramatically compressing output length. The effect
is sharpest on BabyAI, where final per-eval-epoch output reaches roughly an eighth of the ReAct
baseline — approaching an order-of-magnitude compression ratio that, combined with near-perfect
final accuracy, indicates that the actor is almost entirely delegating decisions to a small set of induced
abstractions rather than re-deriving primitive sequences. BabyAI’s high zero-shot baseline (∼67%)
limits how much headroom remains for raw performance gains, but this compression is itself the
evidence that the code delegation pays off in reliability and efficiency.
Crafter is more challenging: the environment is longer-horizon, stochastic, and reactive, so a routine
that is useful in one state can become inappropriate when immediate survival needs arise (e.g. a
zombie attack). This shrinks the room for raw performance gains, but the compression advantage
persists — SpeedRunner’s end-of-training output tokens are more than 3× lower than OPO’s and
ASI’s, even though all four methods begin from the same ReAct cost baseline and ASI and OPO
actually grow rather than shrink. We analyze the structural reorganization that lets SpeedRunner
retain this advantage as environmental randomness rises in §6.3.
H
Full Quantitative Codebook Analysis
We provide the full structural analysis of the learned codebooks here. The main text summarizes the
two most diagnostic call-graph measures, maximum depth and density; this appendix reports the
complete set of statistics, including library size, average depth, and cyclomatic complexity.
Recall that we characterize the codebooks learned by each method using five structural measures,
computed from the final codebook at the end of training. We first construct a directed call graph
G = (V, E) for each codebook, where each node v ∈V is an induced function and each edge
(u, v) ∈E indicates that function u calls function v. Let n = |V |.
• Library size (#Fns) is the number of induced functions, including both public and private functions.
• Maximum depth (max d.) is the length of the longest directed path in G, measuring the height of
the deepest abstraction built by the inducer.
• Average depth (avg d.) is the mean depth across all induced functions in G.
• Density is |E|/(n(n −1)), excluding self-edges, and measures how often induced functions call
other induced functions rather than relying only on the primitive action set.
• Cyclomatic complexity (cyclo.) is the standard McCabe complexity averaged across functions,
capturing whether individual skills encode fixed action sequences or branch over multiple cases.
Table 2 shows that SpeedRunner learns compact but substantially more structured libraries than the
baselines. Relative to ASI, SpeedRunner consistently increases call-graph density, maximum depth,
21


Benchmark
Method
#Fns
Max d.
Avg d.
Density
Cyclo.
Crafter
ASI
33.7±7.2
1.7±0.6
0.61±0.06
0.030±0.008
2.4±1.1
Voyager
1,077±565
5.7±2.1
0.44±0.21
0.0005±0.0003
30.2±7.2
SpeedRunner w/o CI
23.3±11.5
6.3±3.2
2.27±1.33
0.138±0.078
10.9±5.1
SpeedRunner (ours)
22.3±4.0
8.7±2.1
2.78±0.96
0.149±0.042
17.5±3.2
ScienceWorld (task 4)
ASI
56.7±42.1
1.3±0.6
0.61±0.26
0.015±0.006
1.4±0.6
SpeedRunner w/o CI
25.3±4.5
5.0±1.0
1.38±0.34
0.072±0.007
11.7±4.7
SpeedRunner (ours)
30.0±3.0
6.0±1.0
1.99±0.63
0.064±0.015
9.1±1.1
ScienceWorld (task 3)
ASI
73.0±12.2
2.0±0.0
0.84±0.27
0.017±0.002
1.0±0.1
SpeedRunner w/o CI
31.3±6.7
5.3±1.5
1.63±0.39
0.074±0.018
9.1±2.5
SpeedRunner (ours)
30.7±1.5
5.7±0.6
1.84±0.12
0.069±0.020
8.5±2.1
BabyAI
ASI
25.3±6.7
1.0±0.0
0.41±0.12
0.018±0.005
2.0±1.6
SpeedRunner w/o CI
9.0±4.0
3.3±1.5
1.31±0.70
0.178±0.019
8.1±1.1
SpeedRunner (ours)
5.7±0.6
2.3±0.6
0.73±0.40
0.206±0.042
10.9±1.7
Table 2: Structural measures of each method’s final skill library across four benchmark settings, using
GPT-5.4-mini with mean±sd over three seeds. Shaded rows mark the full SpeedRunner system.
Bold marks the most compact library for #Fns and the highest value for the remaining structural
measures within each benchmark.
and average depth, indicating that its skills are not merely shallow wrappers around primitive actions
but reusable routines with hierarchical dependencies. Relative to Voyager on Crafter, SpeedRunner
achieves much higher density with nearly two orders of magnitude fewer functions, suggesting that it
factors repeated behavior into shared helpers instead of accumulating scenario-specific code.
Although Voyager has higher cyclomatic complexity on Crafter, this complexity is concentrated
inside individual functions rather than distributed through reusable library structure. Its density
is only 0.0005, compared with 0.149 for SpeedRunner, meaning that its functions rarely call one
another. Thus, Voyager’s library is large and internally branchy, but weakly compositional: each
function tends to encode a complete scenario rather than decomposing behavior into smaller reusable
components.
The code-interpreter ablation preserves much of SpeedRunner’s organization, but the full method
is generally deeper, denser, or more decision-rich. On Crafter and both ScienceWorld settings,
SpeedRunner has higher maximum and average depth than SpeedRunner w/o CI. On BabyAI, where
the tasks are shorter and the learned libraries are naturally small, SpeedRunner instead has the highest
density and cyclomatic complexity. Overall, SpeedRunner’s advantage is not larger codebooks, but
better organized ones: compact libraries whose skills are more reusable, modular, and compositional.
I
Per-Environment Qualitative Analysis
This appendix expands the three patterns identified in the main paper with concrete examples from
each environment. Each subsection contrasts the key abstraction discovered by ASI, the code-
interpreter-free ablation (SpeedRunner w/o CI), and SpeedRunner.
I.1
BabyAI: Compositional Mission Parsing
The PickUpSeqGoTo task requires parsing a natural-language mission (e.g., “go to the red box after
you pick up the blue ball”) and executing it in a partially-observable grid world. Some phrasings
reverse grammatical order relative to execution order, which is the decisive challenge.
A naïve left-to-right parser inverts execution order on reversed-phrasing missions. SpeedRunner w/o
CI has no parser and leaves disambiguation to the LLM, which occasionally misorders goals (its 6.7%
error). SpeedRunner’s coding agent iterated over historical mission strings inside execute_code,
observed the inversion, and added reordering entries to a priority-ordered pattern list (matching “go
to X after you pick up Y” and “pick up X after you go to Y” before the fallback). The gap between
SpeedRunner w/o CI and SpeedRunner is entirely attributable to this one structural decision.
22


Table 3: Key abstractions per method in the BabyAI environment. The task hinges on parsing
missions where grammatical order can reverse execution order. ASI templates motion sequences
from traces and never parses the mission; SpeedRunner w/o CI patches navigation failures reactively
but still defers mission parsing to the LLM; only SpeedRunner derives an explicit priority-ordered
parser by executing candidate patterns against historical mission strings.
Method
Key abstraction
ASI
Fixed motion sequences (repeat_left_step_and_look, move_left_then_pick_up) ex-
tracted verbatim from successful traces. No function reads observations or branches on state.
SpeedRunner w/o CI
_approach_object encodes three failure modes (target hidden, blocked, laterally offset), each
guard added one sleep phase after the failure that revealed it. No mission parser.
SpeedRunner
_parse_mission_goals: priority-ordered pattern list where reversed-order phrasings are
matched before the left-to-right fallback. Discovered by running candidate parsers against
historical mission strings via execute_code.
I.2
Crafter
Table 4: Crafter: key abstractions per method, showing how each handles the tech-tree progression
and resource-lookup failures characteristic of the environment. ASI crafts unconditionally with no
inventory checks; Voyager appends a new function per episode and never consolidates, yielding
483 near-duplicate variants; SpeedRunner w/o CI builds reactive guards one failure at a time;
SpeedRunner encodes the full progression hierarchy in a single function and diagnoses systematic
lookup failures via trace queries to introduce _bounded_exploration. The Voyager row illustrates
that observation-reading alone is insufficient—consolidation is a necessary co-condition.
Method
Key abstraction
ASI
prepare_basic_wood_tools crafts unconditionally regardless of inventory; observation calls
at function ends are trace artefacts.
SpeedRunner w/o CI
bootstrap_stone_pickaxe gates stone behind a wood-pickaxe check; hostile-check before
rest in stabilize_visible_survival added reactively after deaths. Guards accumulate one
failure at a time.
SpeedRunner
_choose_progress_target encodes the full tech-tree hierarchy in one function, enumerated
via execute_code before any episode. _bounded_exploration added after the inducer diag-
nosed a high rate of failed resource lookups across batches.
Voyager
New function appended per episode; no editing. 212 near-identical collect_one_wood_log_*
variants. Same 14-line observation-parsing block copy-pasted into every function.
SpeedRunner’s _choose_progress_target encodes the full tech tree in one place: higher-tier ores
are gated behind the corresponding pickaxe tier, and stone is de-prioritized once the stockpile is
sufficient. Neither ASI nor SpeedRunner w/o CI has an analogue—ASI crafts unconditionally, and
SpeedRunner w/o CI’s guards are reactive and incomplete.
The second decisive abstraction, _bounded_exploration, illustrates the inducer’s diagnostic loop.
After observing repeated not_found returns from travel_to_visible_resource, the inducer
queried the last batch of traces and printed every top-level not_found alongside its target (wood,
tree, cow). It then walked the trace tree to count call frequencies per batch and observed that
travel_to_visible_resource was being invoked 116–250 times per batch in later rounds—i.e.,
the agent was repeatedly trying and failing to find resources in view. Diagnosing this as a visibility
problem rather than a navigation bug, the inducer added _bounded_exploration, which sweeps the
local neighborhood around the agent for the desired resource before falling back to a not_found.
Voyager is the counterfactual to consolidation: 483 functions, no shared progression model, boilerplate
duplicated hundreds of times, and the lowest score of any method (14.7%, below ASI’s 20.5%).
Reading observations is not sufficient; consolidation is a necessary co-condition.
23


Table 5: ScienceWorld T3 (conductivity): key abstractions per method. The task requires wiring
an unknown substance into a battery-and-bulb circuit and placing it in the correct box based on
whether the bulb lights. The decisive ASI–ablation gap is programmatic result reading: ASI places the
substance after a fixed wait regardless of bulb state, while SpeedRunner w/o CI gates placement on a
regex over the bulb observation. SpeedRunner’s additional contribution is consolidation—hoisting
per-function ambiguity handling into a single wrapper, cutting library size by 22%.
Method
Key abstraction
ASI
Polarity functions setup_conductivity_test and finish_conductivity_check added se-
quentially after wiring failures. Neither clears prior circuit state; placement is unconditional
after a fixed wait().
SpeedRunner w/o CI
_test_conductivity_with_circuit reads the bulb via re.search("which
is
on");
_reset_circuit fully disconnects between attempts. Four polarity patterns added reactively.
SpeedRunner
Same
programmatic
result
reading
as
SpeedRunner
w/o
CI,
plus
a
single
_call_one_arg_action_with_disambiguation
wrapper
that
routes
every
primitive
call through one ambiguity handler. Room search uses DFS up to 24 steps—discovered via
execute_code for cases where the target is not in the stated room.
I.3
ScienceWorld: Programmatic Verification
ScienceWorld T3 (conductivity) requires wiring an unknown substance into a battery-and-bulb circuit
and placing it in the correct box. T4 (find category) requires locating an object of a given category
across rooms.
The decisive gap between ASI and SpeedRunner w/o CI is programmatic result reading: ASI moves
to the target box after a fixed wait regardless of bulb state; SpeedRunner w/o CI gates placement
on re.search("which is on") of the bulb observation. SpeedRunner’s additional contribution is
consolidation—in SpeedRunner w/o CI, ambiguity handling was added ad-hoc inside each function
as the error appeared; SpeedRunner hoisted it into a single wrapper, cutting library size 22% (27 →
21) while applying the fix uniformly.
Table 6: ScienceWorld T4 (find category): key abstractions per method, the one setting where
SpeedRunner w/o CI outperforms SpeedRunner. Both methods program category classification—a
clear advance over ASI’s full delegation to the LLM—but with different strategies: SpeedRunner
w/o CI maintains targeted exclusion lists for observed false positives (“painting,” “egg”), while
SpeedRunner derives general normalization rules via execute_code. The result suggests pre-commit
testing helps most when the failure-mode space is combinatorially large; for finite enumerable false-
positive sets, reactive per-failure refinement is sufficient.
Method
Key abstraction
ASI
focus_roundtrip_pick_move: round-trip navigation template from traces. Category classifi-
cation fully delegated to the LLM.
SpeedRunner w/o CI
_extract_animal_name with priority-ordered patterns and artwork/egg exclusions, derived
from false-positive failures (“painting of a bee”). _try_pickup verifies retrievability before
returning a match.
SpeedRunner
_canonicalize_object_name strips stage labels (“in the dead stage”) via execute_code-
tested rules. _probe_bee_hive_for_target added after observing missed hive contents.
T4 is the one setting where SpeedRunner w/o CI outperforms SpeedRunner. Both implement pro-
grammatic category classification—a clear advance over ASI’s delegation—but with different strate-
gies: SpeedRunner w/o CI uses targeted exclusion lists (skip “painting,” “egg”), while SpeedRunner
uses general normalization rules. That SpeedRunner w/o CI still wins suggests pre-commit testing
helps most when the failure-mode space is combinatorially large—as in BabyAI’s mission ordering
or Crafter’s tech tree—rather than a finite enumerable set of false-positive patterns, where reactive
per-failure refinement is sufficient.
24


Method
Cond.
#Fns
Max d.
Avg d.
Density
Cyclo.
%Combat
Voyager
0x
1,368
5
0.40
0.0002
33.4
0.7%
Voyager
1x
1,077
5.7
0.44
0.0005
30.2
2.9%
Voyager
2x
590
9
0.52
0.0007
31.6
11.5%
SpeedRunner
0x
25
6
2.40
0.132
11.2
24.0%
SpeedRunner
1x
22
8.7
2.78
0.149
17.5
31.5%
SpeedRunner
2x
32
10
2.62
0.094
14.8
53.1%
Table 7: Final-library structure across the three randomness conditions (GPT-5.4-mini). Columns
are the structural measures from §H; %Combat is the fraction of induced functions whose body
references a creature/combat keyword.
Visible N
0 (none)
50
100
200
400
800
909 (full)
Mean Progression
0.173
0.124
0.129
0.130
0.174
0.127
0.153
Table 8: Post-hoc truncation of Voyager’s final 1×-zombie library (909 induced skills). The rollout
agent is shown only the most recently induced N skills; earlier skills remain callable when invoked
from inside a visible one. Mean Progression is the fraction of the 22 Crafter achievements unlocked
per episode, averaged over the 30-episode held-out test set. N = 0 and N = 909 are the no-codebook
and full-library reference points taken from the training-time periodic evaluation of the same run.
J
External Randomness: Additional Analysis
Table 7 reports the full structural measures (definition in §H) that the figure abstracts over.
The mechanism behind SpeedRunner’s %Combat rise is concretely visible in the 2x library:
of its ∼17 combat-aware functions, eleven are existing harvest and movement routines (e.g.,
harvest_visible, clear_front_blocker, opening_turn) that have been edited to accept an
include_combat or allow_combat keyword argument — one kwarg flip and every caller gets the
defensive variant. Voyager, unable to edit, instead spawns a fresh bespoke function for each new en-
counter (collect_wood_log_avoid_front_zombie, collect_one_log_avoiding_east_zombie,
step_adjacent_to_skeleton, . . . ): the same combat logic that SpeedRunner amortizes once across
its call graph is paid in duplicated branches inside every Voyager skill, which is why Voyager’s
per-skill cyclomatic remains the highest of any method even as its density stays near zero.
K
Post-hoc Library Truncation on Voyager
A natural reading of Voyager’s regression under standard (1×) and doubled (2×) zombie pressure
(Table 7) is that its append-only library simply grows past the point where the rollout agent can
usefully attend to it: by the end of training, the GPT-5.4-mini seeds carry libraries of {615, 909, 1707}
public skills, and one of them already overflows the model’s context window outright. If volume
alone were the issue, then keeping only the most recently induced skills should recover most of
the gap to the no-codebook baseline. We therefore ask the following question: can a simple last-N
truncation of Voyager’s final library rescue its 1×-zombie performance?
Setup.
We take the final codebook checkpoint of one 1×-zombie Voyager seed and re-evaluate it
on the same 30-episode Crafter test set used in the main results (§5), holding the rollout agent and
seeds fixed. For each N ∈{50, 100, 200, 400, 800}, we present the rollout agent with only the last
N skills—those induced most recently—as callable tools and as entries in the instruction manual;
the earlier 909 −N skills are hidden from the prompt but remain in the execution namespace, so
any visible skill whose body invokes an earlier one still runs correctly. This isolates the variable
of interest: the size of the agent-visible library, with the underlying behavior of each visible skill
held fixed. We bracket the sweep with two reference points reused from the training-time periodic
evaluation of the same run: N = 0 corresponds to the no-codebook ReAct baseline (the actor runs
with primitives only), and N = 909 corresponds to the full final library.
25


Truncation does not structurally remedy Voyager.
Three observations from Table 8 point against
volume being the binding constraint. First, the truncation curve is non-monotonic in N: there is
no clear rising or falling trend as the visible library shrinks. Second, no truncation meaningfully
exceeds the no-codebook baseline: the closest setting, N = 400, matches it within noise (a gap
of one achievement unlocked on one episode), and every other setting falls below. No choice of
N—including the smallest visible surface we test—turns Voyager’s library into a net asset relative to
running with primitives only. Third, the full library also underperforms the no-codebook baseline on
this seed, consistent with the regression pattern reported in Table 7.
Taken together, these results indicate that Voyager’s regression under standard zombie density is
not a pure context-bloat phenomenon; the composition of the induced library matters more than the
headcount of skills exposed at rollout time.
L
Use of AI Assistants
We used ChatGPT and Claude as assistants for writing (grammar correction, clarity edits, and sugges-
tions on presentation) and coding (implementation and debugging of experimental infrastructure). All
scientific ideas, experimental designs, analyses, claims, and final text were reviewed and approved by
the authors.
26
