ArchAgent v2: A Case Study with the Data
Prefetching Championship
Abraham Gonzalez1, Raghav Gupta2†, Akanksha Jain1, Hanna Alam1, Alexander Novikov3, Po-Sen Huang3,
Matej Balog3, Marvin Eisenberger3, Sergey Shirobokov3, Ngˆan V˜u3,
Hank Levy1, Borivoje Nikoli´c2, Sagar Karandikar2†, Martin Dixon1, Parthasarathy Ranganathan1
1Google
2University of California, Berkeley
3Google DeepMind
{abegonzalez, avjain, hannaalam, mgdixon, hanklevy, parthas}@google.com
raghavgupta@berkeley.edu, {bora, sagark}@eecs.berkeley.edu
{anovikov, posenhuang, matejb, meisenberger, shirobokov, nganvu}@google.com
Abstract—Agentic artificial intelligence has shown great promise
in automating algorithm design, but scaling similar techniques to
computer microarchitecture discovery remains challenging due to
vast search spaces, strict hardware budgets, and long simulation
times. In this work, we present ArchAgent v2, a framework which
scales automated microarchitecture search to multi-level data
prefetching. While the original ArchAgent successfully discovered
single-level cache replacement policies in competition settings, it
does not scale to multi-level prefetching where the design space
and degrees of freedom are larger. To overcome this, we introduce
two new additions to ArchAgent: a cascaded evolutionary search
that subdivides the design space by sequentially evolving and
freezing prefetchers at individual cache levels, and a hardware-
realizability feedback loop that embeds real-time size-estimation
directly into the evolution process.
Evaluated under identical rules of the Fourth Data Prefetching
Championship (DPC4), ArchAgent v2 automatically designs a
three-level prefetcher that outperforms the winning hand-designed
solution, further demonstrating automated agentic discovery as a
useful tool for computer architects. Our discovered policy achieves
a 3.8% geometric mean IPC speedup over the baseline overall
and a 0.3% improvement over the prior champion, BertiGO.
On low-bandwidth single-core configurations, our policy yields a
4.6% performance speedup compared to only 2.6% for BertiGO.
However, multi-core evolution still remains a significant challenge
due to simulation latency impeding evolution speed. Finally, our
profiling of an ArchAgent evolution of over 12,000 candidate
designs provides key insights into how automated evolutionary
agents explore and synthesize complex microarchitectural logic.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advancements in agentic artificial intelligence (AI)
have driven major breakthroughs in automated algorithm design.
Within the computer systems community, closed-loop machine-
learning frameworks are increasingly deployed to automate
optimization and ideation. Specifically, the ArchAgent frame-
work [16] pioneered autonomous microarchitecture discovery
by building a closed-loop evolutionary system for computer
microarchitecture. By coupling a large-language-model-based
(LLM-based) code-generation agent (i.e., AlphaEvolve [28])
with the ChampSim simulator [13], ArchAgent iteratively
generates hardware policies, evaluates them in trace-based
†Work partially done while the author was affiliated with Google.
Problem
Sub-part
Evolve
Sub-part
Evolve
Combined sub-parts
Evolve
Sub-part
Sub-part
Problem
Evolve
Fig. 1: Cascaded divide-and-conquer evolutionary search.
simulation, and uses performance feedback on the evolved
policy to guide subsequent mutations.
While ArchAgent successfully discovered single-level cache
replacement policies, it fails to scale to larger architectural
problems, such as multi-level prefetchers, which present higher
degrees of freedom and stricter physical hardware constraints.
In particular, applying such systems to multi-level data prefetch-
ing increases difficulty along three architectural dimensions.
First, the design space explodes combinatorially as prefetchers
must calculate both target addresses and optimal timing while
tracking program and system-level context. Second, multi-level
prefetching introduces an additional dimension of complexity:
evolving prefetchers at all three levels simultaneously creates
a non-monotonic search space where a performance-improving
mutation at one level can completely invalidate the gains
at another level. Finally, prefetchers must adhere to strict,
independent physical storage budgets (e.g., 32KB of state at
the L1D) that cannot be reliably enforced in existing higher-
level simulators such as ChampSim.
To overcome these barriers, we propose ArchAgent v2,
introducing two primary methodology changes:
• Hardware-Realizability Storage Feedback Loop: We
implement an automated interface that calculates the
physical storage of each proposed prefetcher. Over-budget
1
arXiv:2608.09874v1  [cs.AI]  10 Aug 2026


designs are rejected during compilation and are not
evaluated, providing negative rewards to the system.
• Cascaded Evolutionary Search: Rather than evolving
all prefetchers simultaneously, we partition the search
space. The framework sequentially isolates and optimizes
prefetchers at each cache level (L1D, L2, and LLC), using
the best results of prior levels to prune the search before
conducting global optimizations.
We evaluate ArchAgent v2 with the setup of the Fourth Data
Prefetching Championship (DPC4) [6], starting search from the
competition baseline (i.e., Berti [26] at L1D, Pythia [7] at L2,
no prefetcher at LLC) and optimizing for the official competi-
tion score. To prevent overfitting, the search is performed on the
official training workloads, while final prefetching solutions
are evaluated on a separate, longer, held-out validation set
provided by the competition.
ArchAgent v2 automatically designs an effective competition-
winning set of L1D, L2, and LLC prefetchers. The discovered
multi-level prefetching policy achieves a 3.8% geometric mean
IPC speedup over the competition baseline across all workloads
and configurations, representing a 0.3% improvement over the
championship-winning, hand-designed policy, BertiGO [37].
Notably, in low-bandwidth single-core configurations, where
cache pollution and bus contention are most severe, our
policy significantly outperforms BertiGO’s 2.6% speedup by an
additional 2%. Despite large single-core wins, our discovered
policies exhibit limited gains in multi-core settings due to multi-
core feedback being introduced only during the final stage of
evolution. Multi-core evolutionary search remains challenging
for automated systems due to high simulation latencies and an
exponential increase in search space complexity.
To understand how evolutionary agents navigate microar-
chitectural design spaces, we analyze and profile over 12,000
prefetchers generated by ArchAgent v2. We find that major
breakthroughs stem from the majority of architectural shifts
that require subsequent minor refinements to unlock speedups.
The winning design succeeds by dynamically scaling prefetch
lookahead, throttling bandwidth based on multiple core/memory
signals to prevent congestion, and intelligently arbitrating
between intra- and inter-page memory streams.
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
• We introduce a “cascaded” divide-and-conquer evolu-
tionary approach that sequentially evolves subsets of
different cache levels (e.g., L1D, then L2, then LLC).
• We develop an automated feedback loop for a prefetch-
ers footprint, enforcing strict physical constraints through
appropriate feedback.
• We show that ArchAgent v2 discovers prefetchers that
achieve a 3.8% performance uplift over the baseline
and a 0.3% improvement over the championship hand-
designed policy, BertiGO, with a 4.6% improvement over
baseline on low-bandwidth systems.
• We present an analysis of over 12,000 evaluated ideas,
exploring one lineage of the winning policy’s evolutions,
describing how such systems explore microarchitecture.
Evaluators Pool
Sim
…
Workload
Suite
…
AlphaEvolve
Distributed
Simulation
Cluster
policy.h
- Core count
- $ levels + sizes
- DRAM bandwidth
Sim
Run 
SoTA LLMs 
 w/ 
sampled 
prompts 
Evolve
Generate
Evaluate
Compute metrics 
and populate the 
evolutionary DB
Workload N
Workload 0
ChampSim Instance
Database
Result
aggregation
Evolved
policies
Results
Choose candidate(s) to evolve 
from w/ evolutionary DB
Database
Evolutionary
Fig. 2: Recap overview of the ArchAgent system.
II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we first review the general architecture of
agentic LLM-based discovery systems. We then discuss the
original ArchAgent [16] design, as shown in Figure 2, and
then outline the DPC4 data prefetching competition rules and
setup optimized by ArchAgent v2.
A. Primer on Evolutionary Agentic LLM-Based Discovery
As LLMs have become more capable, a new class of
agentic systems (i.e., harnesses) for algorithmic and scientific
discovery have grown in popularity. These discovery systems
— ranging from evolutionary tools like Google DeepMind’s
AlphaEvolve [28], SkyDiscover [22], OpenEvolve [35], and
ShinkaEvolve [21], to more fully-agentic systems like Scienti-
stOne [23] and Glia/Engram [17], [20] — leverage LLMs to
programmatically propose, refine, and compile code solutions
optimized for target performance objectives. Unlike existing
coding harnesses or more reasoning-acting coding agents (e.g.,
Google Antigravity [14], Anthropic Claude Code [4], OpenAI
Codex [29], OpenCode [38]), these discovery systems typically
add more determinism and utilize hardened pre-specified
evaluations to ensure a valid optimization over long runtimes.
While initially developed for scientific algorithm discovery [28]
and software systems optimization [11], such frameworks have
recently been proposed for automated hardware design and
architectural co-design [3], [8], [16], [34].
Focusing on evolutionary frameworks (i.e., [21], [22], [28],
[35]), the core of these frameworks is an orchestration loop
that continuously “evolves” code. The controller first samples
from a structured program database — frequently managed
via quality-diversity algorithms like MAP-Elites [25] or island-
based populations [33], [39] — using prior implementations
and their associated metrics to seed subsequent iterations. The
generation stage employs an LLM, either as a single-turn
generator or a multi-turn coding agent, to synthesize new
candidate implementations. These candidates are then evaluated
using a user-defined method and the resulting performance
metrics are returned to the controller to update the program
database. This iterative loop of sampling, generating, and
2


evaluating continues until the optimization target or search
timeout is reached. To guide the generation step, users provide
a base prompt detailing the target problem, the execution
interface, and any domain-specific hints to guide the search.
B. ArchAgent v1 Overview
The ArchAgent framework [16] (ArchAgent v1) was the first-
of-its-kind automated computer architecture discovery system
built on AlphaEvolve [28]. Initially targeting cache replace-
ment, ArchAgent focused on discovering new C++ model
implementations of cache replacement policies compatible with
the ChampSim microarchitectural simulator.
To achieve this, the framework constructs LLM prompts
that establish an expert computer architect persona, outline the
ChampSim cache replacement API and class structure, and
define strict hardware storage constraints (e.g., a 48KB budget
for cache replacement metadata). Each generated policy is
subsequently evaluated in parallel across a comprehensive set
of workload traces. The simulator measures performance in
instructions per cycle (IPC) across these target workloads.
Using this closed-loop evolutionary process, ArchAgent
automatically discovers high-performing policies within a
month of autonomous search, achieving a 0.9% IPC speedup
over the state-of-the-art on heavily optimized single-core SPEC
2006 workloads, and over a 5.3% IPC speedup on public multi-
core Google Workload Traces [15].
C. Fourth Data Prefetching Championship and BertiGO
Established in 2009, the Data Prefetching Championships
(DPC) [1], [2], [6], [18] aim to advance the state-of-the-art in
data prefetching by providing the community with standardized
infrastructure and traces to evaluate prefetching ideas. The
fourth iteration of the championship, DPC4 [6], was held in
2026, and it built upon prior iterations of the competition
by expanding the scope of multi-level prefetching (at the
L1D, L2, and LLC), updated workloads (spanning AI/ML
inference, datacenter-class workloads, complex graph-based
apps), and more core configurations (single- and multi-core
configurations).
Prefetchers are evaluated on ChampSim, a widely-used
academic C++-based microarchitectural simulator. Participants
implement prefetchers utilizing common APIs to access mi-
croarchitectural state and system-level feedback where designs
must adhere to strict, independent physical storage limits per
cache level: 32KB for L1D, 128KB for L2, and 256KB for
LLC. To ensure solutions generalize to different operating
conditions, submissions are tested across three distinct system
configurations: two single-core configurations (one with ample
and one with restricted DRAM bandwidth) and a multi-
core configuration with ample DRAM bandwidth. Training
workloads are provided to participants, but final submissions
are ranked based on their performance over a separate, held-out
evaluation workload suite.
All championship submissions are measured against a state-
of-the-art baseline consisting of the Berti prefetcher at the L1D
level, a Pythia prefetcher at the L2 level, and no prefetcher
The simulated storage budgets for the prefetcher
to implement is:
- L1D ‘my_l1d_prefetcher‘ = 32KB
- L2 ‘my_l2_prefetcher‘ = 128KB
- LLC ‘my_llc_prefetcher‘ = 256KB
Honestly stay within the budget and truthfully
report the number of utilized bytes using the
‘int prefetcher_size()‘ function per prefetcher.
When you add a new component, you should account
for its size in the ‘prefetchersize()‘ function.
You should only remove an entry from the
‘prefetcher_size()‘ function when you remove the
component.
If a C++ type is used to represent hardware,
ensure proper masking is added to enforce that the
C++ type is used correctly.
For example, if a ‘uint64_t‘ is used to represent
3 bits, any write to that C++ symbol using
‘uint64_t‘ must mask out the upper 61 bits
(64 - 3) before the write.
In this example, the 3 bit size can be used for
prefetcher size budget calculations instead of the
full 64 bit size of the C++ type.
FALSE REPORTING OR EXCEEDING THE STORAGE BUDGET
WILL BE REJECTED.
Fig. 3: Example storage budget restriction prompt.
at the LLC. The state-of-the-art (SoTA) DPC4 submission,
BertiGO [37], builds on this baseline by introducing path
signature tracking to the L1D Berti engine, integrating set-
dueling mechanisms into the L2 Pythia prefetcher, and adding
an adaptive next-line prefetcher at the LLC. The majority of
BertiGO’s gains are driven by L1D optimization, with only
minor performance gains contributed by L2 and LLC updates.
III. ARCHAGENT V2 FOR DATA PREFETCHING
To discover multi-level prefetchers, we extend ArchAgent
in two ways: by adding (1) a hardware-realizability feedback
loop, and (2) a cascaded divide-and-conquer methodology to
break down the problem into smaller tractable problems.
A. Hardware-Realizability Storage Feedback Loop
While the ChampSim simulator provides mechanisms to
measure metrics such as IPC, it does not provide a mechanism
to measure the hardware cost of proposed prefetchers (i.e.,
area or power costs). Typically for competitions such as DPC4
which require strict storage budgets (32KB for L1D, 128KB for
L2, and 256KB for LLC prefetchers), this area cost is estimated
after the algorithm is complete by hardware architects manually
estimating the size of different components and obtaining an
overall size. However, a major challenge with automated code
generation is that LLM optimizers often optimize solely for
performance metrics, proposing complex algorithms that violate
physical hardware constraints.
To enforce these competition storage budgets during evo-
lution, we integrated hardware-realizability area feedback
in ArchAgent. First, like ArchAgent v1, we prompted the
LLM with the precise storage limits so that ideas would
3


probabilistically adhere to storage limits. Next, we imple-
mented a custom simulator interface function per prefetcher,
prefetcher_size(), which calculates the policy’s storage
footprint based on its state and returns an integer size for bytes
of storage. We used initial literature to fill out this function
per baseline prefetcher (e.g., Berti and Pythia), using C++
parameters and code to derive the overall size at runtime.
During compilation and simulation, the evaluation checks the
prefetcher_size() function per prefetcher and checks
against the competition size requirements. If a candidate policy
exceeds the allowed budget, it is rejected immediately. Finally,
we updated the prompt as shown in Figure 3 to guide the
LLM to update both the prefetcher logic and the prefetcher
size function, ensuring size calculations remain synchronized
with implementation changes. Through offline LLM judges,
the code generation step of ArchAgent was able to faithfully
adhere to updating both logic and size functions properly, while
a manual check was done on the final output to ensure sizing
was correct. Combined these additions allowed the LLM to
better adhere to the storage budget per prefetcher throughout
the evolution process bounding viable ideas by one aspect of
realizability.
B. Cascaded Evolutionary Search
The combination of optimizing three prefetchers in-tandem
and slow ChampSim simulations (up-to or exceeding 12
hours to evaluate each change) introduces an extremely large
and slow search space to navigate, leading to ArchAgent v1
struggling to make meaningful progress. To address this, we
split the design space into a “cascade”-style divide-and-conquer
evolutionary process where each prefetcher was evolved in
isolation, then globally-optimized across all prefetchers, in
multiple stages. Furthermore, we reduced the design space by
limiting the search to optimize only single-core configurations
when evolving individual prefetchers. Only when all prefetchers
were optimized, did we introduce multi-core configurations
into the search space. This methodology is shown in Figure 4.
This strategy can be broken down into two general phases:
first optimizing each prefetcher level in sequence, then globally-
optimizing all prefetchers.
1) Individual Prefetcher Optimizations: To begin with, we
evolved each prefetcher in isolation, re-using the best result
from a lower level of the hierarchy as an initialization for
the next level. In addition, we only evolved with single-core
ChampSim workload configurations, equally weighing the low
and high bandwidth configurations. The setup was as follows:
1) L1D optimization: We first evolved only the L1D
prefetcher (starting from Berti), keeping the baseline L2
(i.e., Pythia) and LLC (i.e., nothing) prefetchers static.
2) L2 optimization: Next, once the L1D prefetcher perfor-
mance began to plateau, we selected the best-performing
L1D candidate, froze its implementation, and then
evolved only the L2 prefetcher (starting from Pythia).
3) LLC optimization: After the L2 optimization converged,
we then froze the best L1D and L2 prefetcher candidates,
and then evolved only the LLC prefetcher.
L1D Only
L2 Only
LLC Only
L1+L2+LLC Only
L1+L2+LLC Only
Training on 
Single-Core Only
Training on 
Single/Multi-
Core Conﬁgs
From L1, 
L2, and 
LLC runs
From 
individual 
runs and 
combined 
single-core 
run
Final Candidate 
Sample
…
…
…
…
…
Updates between evolutions
(Lineage and Summaries)
Fig. 4: Evolutionary search “cascade” methodology.
While this selectively optimized for L1D, then L2, then LLC,
this matched prior intuition that workloads were more amenable
to L1D prefetcher optimization (as seen in DPC4 submissions).
This L1D dominant optimization matched the prior winner,
BertiGO’s, improvements, which were L1D dominant.
2) Globally-Optimizing All Prefetchers: While the individual
prefetcher optimizations were running, two new evolutionary
runs were spawned to do global optimizations of the algorithms
presented. The goal of these runs was to further optimize
all prefetchers together instead of individually to allow for
synergistic improvements between prefetchers. This was done
by a prior runs database, which stored previous successful
bests from any evolutionary run, in two parts:
1) Single-core cross-prefetcher optimization: First, all
prefetchers were optimized at once with the seed best
prefetchers from each individual optimization run only
on single-core ChampSim workloads. In addition, at
random intervals, the prompt to generate new prefetcher
candidates was injected with the top performing can-
didates and their lineages/summaries from the other
individual optimization runs (e.g., only the L1D) while
they were running. This allowed upstream individual
prefetcher runs to continue running and optimizing while
influencing the combined evolution. Additionally, in
this run, we double weighted the low bandwidth single
core configuration (e.g., geomean(lowBW, lowBW,
highBW)) to encourage evolution to optimize low
bandwidth configurations. This was done to give a
proxy for multi-core workloads, avoiding slow multi-
core simulation speeds, since the multi-core configuration
4


TABLE I: Training/evolution and simulation methodology.
Configuration
Phase
Instructions (Millions)
Total
Warmup
Single-Core
Training/Evolution
60
15
Full Validation
200
50
Multi-Core
Training/Evolution
12.5
5
Full Validation
50
20
splits its bandwidth across multiple cores similar to the
low bandwidth single-core configuration.
2) Multi-core cross-prefetcher optimization: Then to produce
a final set of prefetcher candidates, we then took the best
prefetchers from the cross-prefetcher optimization, and
further evolved them concurrently with both the single-
core and multi-core configurations. Similar to the other
cross-prefetcher optimization, at random intervals, the
prompt was injected with top performing candidates from
all other runs (both the individual prefetcher optimiza-
tions and the single-core cross-prefetcher optimizations).
This strategy reduces the complexity of LLM reasoning per
step and prioritizes search effort on the near-to-core cache
levels, where there is highest latency hiding potential.
C. Training/Evolution Versus Validation Methodology
We used the existing competition benchmarks to evaluate
each candidate policy. Specifically, we evaluated candidates on
a reduced instruction trace length during the evolutionary search
phase (training/evolution) and validated the final selections on
long instruction traces to ensure optimality and generality.
Table I describes the training and evaluation methodology
used. During evolution, simulations ran for 60 million in-
structions after 15 million instructions of warmup for single-
core, and 12.5 million instructions after 5 million warmup
for multi-core. In contrast, full validation ran for 200 million
instructions (50 million warmup) and 50 million instructions
(20 million warmup), respectively. Single-core benchmarks
were evaluated individually according to the championship
guidelines. For multi-core configurations, during training, we
generated 100 random combinations of mixed workloads (e.g.,
SPEC17 and Graph workload mixes) to evaluate the policies
under diverse and heterogeneous resource contention. The final
evaluation used the championship evaluation set of single- and
multi-core traces, which included both unseen workloads for
single-core configurations and novel trace mixes for multi-core
configurations to verify generalizability.
This mixture of trace lengths and workloads for both training
and validation ensured robust generated policies. We expect
that expanding the training set to cover additional workloads
would yield even greater robustness.
IV. THE EVOLVED MULTI-LEVEL PREFETCHING
ALGORITHM
We describe and evaluate the winning generated multi-level
prefetcher policy, using the Section III methodology, that beats
DPC4 SoTA policies within two months of evolution time.
L1 Demand Intf.
(e.g., Addr., DRAM BW, IPC)
Global Delta 
History 
Tracker
Reinforcement Learning Arbitrator
Original Berti 
Core
Prefetch Request
Global Stride 
Tracker
Fig. 5: High-level overview of the L1 modifications. Dotted
lines indicate new/modified components.
TABLE II: Storage breakdown for the evolved prefetchers.
Structure
Breakdown
KB
L1D
CurrentPgs.Tbl.
63e×277b
2.1
Prev.RequestsTbl.
1024e×28b
3.5
Prev.PrefetchesTbl.
512e×57b
3.6
RecordPgs.Tbl.
1024e×135b
16.9
IPTbl.
1024e×10b
1.3
GlobalStrideTracker
128e×110b
1.7
GlobalDeltaHist.Tbl.
512e×20b
1.3
RL.Arbiter
512e×12b
0.8
Misc.Registers
–
0.04
TotalL1D
Limit:32KB
31.1
L2
Q-ValueStore
5fts.×18acts.×16b
99.0
SignatureTbl.
128e×300b
4.7
PrefetchTracker
128e×403b
6.3
TotalL2
Limit:128KB
110.0
LLC
StrideTbl.
2048e×67b
16.8
TaggedAddressTbl.
12288e×41b
61.5
GlobalEventHistory
32768e×38b
152.0
TotalLLC
Limit:256KB
230.3
A. Prefetcher Descriptions
In this subsection, we describe in detail the L1D, L2 and
LLC prefetcher components. The generated prefetcher ensemble
follows two key design principles. First, it adds new engines
to track patterns that the baseline did not capture, such
as, global strides, irregular deltas, and temporal prefetches.
Secondly, it introduces new arbitration mechanisms to choose
prefetch engines and modulate aggressiveness.
Each prefetcher adheres to the competition storage budget
for each cache; 31.1 KB for L1D (out of 32 KB), 110.0 KB for
L2 (out of 128 KB), and 230.3 KB for LLC (out of 256 KB).
Table II further breaks down the storage used, per component,
for each prefetcher.
1) L1D Prefetcher: The evolved L1D prefetcher, as shown
in Figure 5, enhances the baseline Berti design by incorporating
a Global Stride Tracker (GST) and Global Delta History Table
(GDHT) to complement Berti’s local-delta tracking system.
Additionally, a Reinforcement Learning (RL) Arbitrator is
added to select prefetch candidates across the engines.
5


Feature Extraction
PC
QVStore
(updated)
Action Space
Pow2 Strides
L2 Demand Intf.
(e.g., Addr., DRAM BW)
PC + Delta
Delta-Path
Oﬀset
-Path
Delta + 
Oﬀset
Sum Pooling
Conﬁdence Threshold
Dual-mode
BW Throttler + 
Rewarder
Prefetch Request
Q-Updates
Fig. 6: High-level overview of the L2 modifications. Dotted
lines indicate new/modified components.
Global Engines: While the baseline Berti prefetcher is effec-
tive at capturing local, per-IP patterns within page boundaries, it
does not capture cross-IP spatial streams that traverse physical
pages. To cover this gap, two engines were added: the Global
Stride Tracker (GST) covers linear step streams, and the Global
Delta History Table (GDHT) covers irregular page-level jumps
that don’t follow a regular step pattern.
Arbitration: An RL Arbitrator was introduced to choose
between candidates from the three different prefetch engines.
The arbiter uses a global path, from the PC and a sliding delta
history context window to evaluate different engines. Additional
metadata is added to link long-latency evictions directly back
to the specific engine that issued them, allowing the arbiter
to accurately reward or penalize the GST and GDHT engines
based on real-time cache utility. To prevent bus congestion and
cache thrashing, real-time memory bandwidth thresholds were
also used to dynamically throttle the arbitrator’s aggressiveness.
2) L2 Prefetcher: The evolved L2 prefetcher refines the
Pythia baseline without major changes, focusing on comple-
menting the L1D prefetcher. Rather than large-scale restructur-
ing, ArchAgent upgraded the RL feature representations and
action-space characteristics as shown in Figure 6.
Context, Action, and Pooling Upgrades: Pythia’s RL frame-
work was upgraded with extra features (from 2 to 5 features)
and extending available action step choices to 18 choices (from
15). The 5 active features expanded to cover local program
context (e.g., using only one PC or PC with a delta) as well as
PC history (e.g., using the last 4 PCs, deltas, and offsets). The
18 action choices are created by hardcoding the action space to
mainly generate positive and negative power-of-two memory
strides helping to cover many variations of streaming, strided,
and matrix access patterns. Finally, ArchAgent switched to
sum-pooling with a confidence threshold, to help reduce cache
pollution and DRAM traffic during unfamiliar or non-strided
access patterns.
Bandwidth Throttling: Under high memory traffic, the
throttler limits prefetch burst degrees and enforces higher
confidence to send a prefetch. Additionally, the reward feedback
is augmented in these high traffic states, to force less bus
congestion.
Simple Stride 
Generator
Stride Table
Historical Sequence Generator
Tagged 
Address 
Table
Global Event 
History Table
Arbitrator
Sliding delta window
Prefetch Request
LLC Demand Intf.
(e.g., Addr., DRAM BW)
Fig. 7: High-level overview of the LLC modifications. Dotted
lines indicate new/modified components.
3) LLC Prefetcher: At the LLC level, two prefetch gen-
erators were added as shown in Figure 7. The first prefetch
generator records and replays irregular, pointer-chasing miss
sequences. The second prefetch generator detects regular linear
and strided access patterns. Both prefetch generators modulate
prefetch degree based on real-time DRAM bandwidth as
well. These are arbitrated by a sliding delta tracking window
which monitors recent cache memory misses and calculates
the mathematical ratio of unique step distances. If memory
requests are orderly and follow simple repeated steps, it uses
the standard regular linear and strided engine. If requests are
highly “chaotic”, it switches to the historical sequence engine.
B. Evaluation
Figure 8 shows the DPC4 scores for prior multi-level SoTA
prefetchers compared to the ArchAgent’s evolved prefetcher
(i.e., prefetching policy). Overall, compared to the baseline, we
see a 3.8% performance uplift in geomean IPC speedup versus
the baseline, winning the competition. When compared directly
to the prior SoTA DPC4 championship winner, BertiGO, we see
a 0.3% uplift. Looking at the different core count and bandwidth
configurations, we see that the performance improvement
overall comes from better single-core performance at the
cost of multi-core performance. This is due to the cascade
prioritizing single-core performance in the workflow then later
optimizing multi-core performance. Gains over BertiGO come
from this optimization for single-core workloads, especially
in low bandwidth settings (beating SoTA by over 2%) at the
cost of multi-core performance (where the AI-generated policy
loses by about 1.5%). In this diagram, multi-core performance
evaluations are run using 4-core mixes per suite (i.e., 4 traces
all from one suite, e.g., SPEC17) and across suites (i.e., 4
traces with 1 per suite, e.g., 1 from SPEC17, Graph, Google,
and AI-ML).
Figure 9 shows the performance of the single-core config-
urations divided into workload suites. Here we see that the
evolved multi-level prefetcher does better in Graph and Google
workloads across low- and high-bandwidth configurations than
prior SoTA winners while having mixed gains over BertiGO in
other workloads such as AI-ML and SPEC. Generally, winning
margins are higher for low-bandwidth configurations for the
evolved policy.
6


EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.10
Geomean IPC Normalized to
Berti@L1D/Pythia@L2
1.0265
1.0262
1.0516
1.0561
Single-core Full BW
EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
1.0153
1.0198
1.0257
1.0456
Single-core Limited BW
EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
1.0063
1.0178
1.0285
1.0133
Multi-core
EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
1.0160
1.0212
1.0352
1.0382
Overall
Fig. 8: ArchAgent’s policy compared against the baseline/SoTA prefetchers (i.e., EDP [27], Global Berti [32], and BertiGO [37]).
SPEC
(High BW)
SPEC
(Low BW)
Graph
(High BW)
Graph
(Low BW)
Google
(High BW)
Google
(Low BW)
AI-ML
(High BW)
AI-ML
(Low BW)
Workload and ChampSim Configuration
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Geomean IPC Normalized to
Berti@L1D/Pythia@L2
1.0244
1.0005
1.0228
1.0127
1.0133
1.0212
1.0943
1.0086
1.0393
1.0146
1.0298
1.0214
1.0118
1.0221
1.0737
1.0135
1.0455
1.0337
1.0386
1.0330
1.0113
1.0215
1.2771
1.0285
1.0423
1.0240
1.0493
1.0507
1.0318
1.0515
1.1978
1.0390
EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
Fig. 9: ArchAgent’s policy measured across distinct workload suites and single-core ChampSim championship configurations.
SPEC
Graph
Google
AI-ML
Overall
Workload Suite
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
Geomean Harmonic IPC Normalized to
Berti@L1D/Pythia@L2
1.0029
0.9911
1.0230
1.0143
0.9989
1.0310
0.9813
1.0251
1.0510
0.9999
1.0557
0.9712
1.0198
1.0814
1.0147
1.0398
0.9165
1.0309
1.0910
0.9902
EDP
Global Berti
BertiGO
ArchAgent
Fig. 10: ArchAgent’s policy measured across distinct workload suites using the multi-core ChampSim championship configuration.
Figure 10 shows the performance of the multi-core con-
figurations divided into different workloads. In this diagram,
the “Overall” grouping represents only using 4-core mixes
across suites while suite-level evaluations are run with 4-core
mixes within the same suite. Here the improvements come
from Google and AI-ML workloads over prior SoTA, despite
the final prefetcher losing in the overall mix.
V. PROFILING AN ARCHAGENT V2 EVOLUTION
To understand the evolution trajectory of the prefetcher,
this section extensively profiles the first—and longest running
evolution—for the L1D prefetcher on single-core workloads.
Importantly, this evolution is just the first step of our cascaded
approach, so the prefetcher produced at the end of this evolution
does not correspond to the L1D prefetcher evolved at the end
of all the cascaded steps. We answer the following questions:
A. How many prefetchers were evaluated?
Figure 11 shows that over 12,000 candidate prefetchers
were evaluated during the first evolution’s lifetime. These are
split into two main categories: prefetchers that were valid and
contributed to an improvement, and prefetchers that didn’t
contribute to an improvement (including designs that compiled
incorrectly, had low performance, etc). For this particular
7


0
10
20
30
40
Elapsed Days
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Cumulative Evaluated Designs
Passing Evaluated Ideas
Evaluated Ideas That Were Discarded
(Failed or Lower Performance)
Fig. 11: Success and failure of evaluated ideas.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Elapsed Days
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Geomean IPC Normalized to
Berti@L1D/Pythia@L2
Best
Binned Min
Binned Median
Binned Average
Min Trend
Median Trend
Average Trend
Relative Score Frequency
(Weighted by Volume)
Fig. 12: Score and heatmap over time.
evolution, ideas were equally split amongst these two categories.
Given the scale of the evolution, we conclude that ArchAgent
could, in parallel, iterate through many more ideas than a
human could. However, the large failure rate also points to
inefficiencies in the evolution loop.
B. How varied were the generated prefetchers?
Figure 12 shows the performance variance of designs over
time. The Y-axis shows geomean IPC of the proposed prefetcher
compared to the competition baseline (Berti at the L1D and
Pythia at the L2), while the X-axis shows time. The red line is
the best result from the evolution at any point in time, and the
heatmap (light grey dots) underneath shows evaluations done
throughout the evolution lifetime. The point intensity tells how
many evaluations led to that same metric at that time.
The heatmap shows that designs show high variance in
performance. Despite the overall best increasing over time,
ArchAgent v2 still tries exhaustively many ideas that range
from good to bad. The median/mean trend lines show that the
average proposals are still spread around the baseline. This
indicates that while the probability of generating a good idea
increases over time, the trajectory of the average proposal
does not improve, which again points to inefficiencies in the
evolutionary loop.
C. How did the agent arrive at these final ideas?
Next, we track the agent’s trajectory to understand how it
arrived at the final best L1D prefetcher algorithm result for
this evolution. We will see that many ideas and their origins
in this evolution contributed to the final prefetcher design.
Since it is impractical to describe and track thousands of
prefetcher designs, we define a taxonomy of design modifi-
cations that the agent makes broken into “What” the LLM
did to obtain the performance gain and “Why” it deemed to
be viable/valuable. These types of taxonomies are similar to
other works that help to diagnose why evolutionary algorithms
fail [10], [31]. We reuse the “What” taxonomy provided by [31]
while the “Why” taxonomy is created by an offline analysis
of all ideas, as shown in Tables III and IV. For the following
analysis, an LLM judge analyzed the specific change made
by the agent and attributed a percentage to each taxonomy
category (e.g., 50% attributed to an “architectural change” v.s.
50% to “hyperparameter tuning”).
1) Breakdown Of All Ideas: Across all ideas that contributed
to the final idea, we see that 50% of changes were “architectural
changes” and there is a long tail of other changes that are
in other categories. This shows that ArchAgent generates
various kinds of changes that are intermingled into more
performant changes. Analyzing “why” it produced the changes
led to a more even mix. First, we see that “pattern detection”
is dominant at about 35% of all ideas. Of the remaining
ideas, most ideas were spawned from the LLM thinking
about “hardware efficiency,” “execution history disambiguation,”
“bandwidth management,” and “cache pollution,” each about
14%. This shows that the LLM, given the feedback from
the simulator, was able to infer enough about the workloads,
execution history, and more to make reasonable optimizations.
We expect that with even more context provided (e.g., more
metrics or workload analysis), we can further refine what and
why a change was made.
2) Main Lineage Breakdown: Next, we look at the ideas
along the main lineage, which is defined as the evolutionary
path of the best program back to the initial program baseline.
Figure 13 shows the breakdown of the main lineage with respect
to the “What” taxonomy. If a point had multiple categories
associated with it, we only display the dominant one. Note,
the primary lineage doesn’t have monotonically increasing
performance. This shows that an idea might not produce any
performance benefit until it is refined or composed with other
changes.
For the main lineage, we see that 65% of the modifications
were “architectural changes” with less “composition” and “local
refinement” indicating that larger changes had more impact.
The biggest boost in performance was an “architectural change”
providing a 4% boost over its parent in the middle (around days
20 to 30). As stated earlier, this can be misleading, as at this
point multiple well-scoring programs from other island-like
groups combined at this point. Analyzing the parents of this
jump, we see three main parent programs injected into the
prompt that led to this large jump:
8


TABLE III: “What” taxonomy.
Category
Description
Bug Fix
Correcting errors or restoring intended behavior without adding features.
External Dependency
Changes driven by external libraries, environments, or API surfaces.
Architectural Change
Fundamental changes to layout, topology, engine framework, or core logic pipelines.
Composition
Combining multiple existing modules or prefetchers to work together.
Local Refinement
Tuning or fine-tuning existing placement, mapping, or logic constraints without new structures.
Pruning
Removing unused tables, feedback logic, dead code, or redundant components.
Refactor
Code restructuring without changing execution performance or underlying logic.
Efficiency
Optimizations targeted at cycle latency, execution throughput, or overhead reduction.
Hyperparameter Tuning
Adjustments to constant threshold values, decay rates, or static parameters.
Other
Any classification that does not strictly fit the structural modifications defined above.
TABLE IV: “Why” taxonomy.
Category
Description
Bandwidth Management
Adjusting prefetch aggressiveness based on memory traffic to avoid congestion.
Execution History
Disambiguation
Using execution history/paths to separate overlapping access patterns.
Pattern Detection Expansion
Upgrading logic to capture longer, wider, or inter-page access patterns.
Cache Pollution Mitigation
Adding confidence filtering to stop inaccurate prefetches from displacing useful data.
Multi-Level Coordination
Making all prefetchers work together rather than conflicting/duplicating effort.
Hardware Efficiency
Optimizing logic and storage to fit within physical area and timing constraints.
Algorithmic Tuning
Adjusting parameters, counters, or thresholds without changing the core design.
Other
Any classification that does not strictly fit the motivations defined above.
0
10
20
30
40
Elapsed Days
0.99
1.00
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
1.06
Geomean IPC Normalized to
Berti@L1D/Pythia@L2
Baseline
Architectural Change
Local Refinement
Hyperparameter Tuning
Pruning
Composition
Bug Fix
Fig. 13: Annotated main lineage.
• Named “Resonance Aware Dynamic Arbitrator”, this
parent provided the highest performance boost (over
4.5% IPC boost over the main lineage’s parent). This
change combined prior ideas on global stride and temporal
predictors, checking if predictions matched from the two
before issuing a prefetch. If a prefetch was determined to
be speculative, then prefetches were redirected to higher
cache levels to avoid displacing in-use L1D cache lines.
• Named “Path Aware Arbitrated Prefetcher”, this parent
provided a 4.3% IPC boost over the main lineage’s parent.
This added extra XORing of PC information into predictor
table keys to reduce aliasing.
• Named “Refractory Mask Prefetch Filter”, this parent
provided a 4% IPC boost over the main lineage’s parent.
This added a filter for prefetch requests, temporarily
blocking duplicate requests until lower demand accesses
or program phase changes.
These prior sets of ideas had been developing over time
separately from this main lineage in other program database
groups but were chosen and combined by the evolutionary
database at this time.
D. What were the top ideas?
To break down monolithic top changes, we further break-
down the entire directed acyclic graph of changes leading to
the final evolution output. This allows understanding of how
the monolithic large jump in Figure 13 was influenced by what
core ideas, as top ideas don’t necessarily correspond to the
main idea that leads to the change.
Using a custom graph traversal algorithm, we can recursively
break down monolithic top ideas into sub-top-ideas. This is
done by recursively looking at lineages starting from the best
program. First, we examine the main lineage and cluster top
ideas (relative to their parents). Of the top clustered ideas, we
look at each idea’s parent and have an LLM judge determine
which parents led to the main impact. Of those parents, we
then treat this as a new lineage, and repeat the clustering loop.
Out of all top ideas that contributed to the final best program,
we show the top ideas, relative to the IPC gain over their parent
ideas, in Table V.
9


TABLE V: Top ideas breakdown.
% Gain
Over Parent
Name
Overview
11.0%
Velocity Aware Delta Engine
Adds “velocity” monitoring (measuring instruction retirement) to scale prefetch
lookahead distance by adding a new “global delta table”.
10.9%
Execution Velocity Berti Prefetcher
Adds “velocity” monitoring (measuring instruction retirement and miss latencies)
to scale prefetch lookahead distance by adding a mask per entry.
7.7%
Feedback Guided Stride Prefetcher
Replaces old table with new two-level table that better tracks intra- versus
inter-page strides, in addition to adapting with bandwidth.
4.6%
Cognitive Genome Hybrid
Adds extra XORing of branch paths and PCs to index prefetch tables, “velocity”
monitoring (instruction retirement), extra masking per prefetch tables (to filter
unproductive lookahead), and other smaller changes.
4.5%
Context Reward Based Arbitration
Adds an arbitrator between intra/inter-page and stride prefetchers using “velocity“
monitoring (instruction context, retirement rate, and memory bandwidth).
Across these ideas, we see five main contributions:
• Execution History and Path-Signature Disambiguation
– What: XORing global branch path history with the
PC to index prefetch tables.
– Why: Helps eliminate instruction aliasing.
• Cache Pollution Mitigation via Depth-Mask Pruning
– What: Adding a bit-vector “depth mask” per tracking
entry to avoid longer invalid lookahead prefetches.
– Why: Prevents over-speculation near loop boundaries
that causes cache pollution. This pruning tracks his-
torical accuracy per lookahead depth and dynamically
truncates deep prefetches, guaranteeing high precision
without evicting in-use lines.
• Multi-Level Coordination and Cache Hierarchy Routing
– What: Routes high-confidence prefetches to L1D
while
diverting
speculative
or
deep-lookahead
prefetches to lower-level caches.
– Why: High-distance prefetches are valuable for hiding
DRAM latency but dangerous to small L1D caches
thus routing speculative prefetches to L2/LLC warms
the lower memory hierarchy ahead of time without
displacing critical L1 data.
• Instant Phase-Transition Suppression
– What: Use higher-order derivatives of instruction
retirement rates to detect program phase shifts.
– Why: When code transitions between phases (e.g.,
from pointer chasing to linear scanning), avoid firing
stale prefetches.
• Hardware Realizability and Area/Timing Pruning
– What: Replace monolithic large tables with smaller
tables and arbitrate between them.
– Why: Avoid adding more monolithic tables that might
not hit 1-cycle L1 hit timing and area budgets.
Figure 14 visualizes where top ideas are located through
the evolutionary run represented as a directed acyclic graph.
Numbered nodes represent top ideas numbered based on how
much improvement was given over their parents (e.g., #3 is the
3rd best top idea). Small white nodes represent one or more
intermediate nodes in between best ideas that bridge different
branches/lineages together.
Here we see that sub-top-ideas come from throughout the
evolution on many different branches. Some of the top best
ideas (i.e., #2 and #3) are seeds for multiple branches, indicating
their importance and widespread effect across all branches.
VI. RELATED WORK AND DISCUSSIONS
This work is complementary to the work that is happening
to improve both existing agentic harnesses for optimization as
well as improvements in LLMs. We expect improvements in
both spaces to yield larger gains more rapidly and with better
efficiency as more reasoning and context is provided to newer
LLMs. For this work, we focus on using AlphaEvolve [28] since
this work is an extension of ArchAgent’s original framework.
The usage of such agentic tooling in computer architecture
domains is growing in popularity. Since the November 2025
publication of ArchAgent [3], more work in both optimiza-
tion [8] and full-scale designs [12], [34] has occurred across
domains in computer architecture. We expect more such agentic
work to grow in the future with the proliferation of more
dedicated workshops and conferences in the space [5], [24]
and improvements in LLMs/harnesses. This work builds on the
original ArchAgent line of work, but has general insights for
any harness built around computer architecture in the future.
For prefetcher design and optimization work, there is a
long history of human-created prefetchers. Instead of focusing
on any particular generated design, this work emphasizes
that ArchAgent can generate competitive prefetcher designs
automatically, demonstrating one such example. While the
prefetcher generated is able to beat the prior SoTA prefetcher
design, more work is needed to have the tool emit significant
novel advancements. First, in the L1D prefetcher generated, its
RL-based arbitration (contrasting with standalone RL prefetch-
ers [7], [30]), GST’s changing stride tracker (contrasting with
constant stride tracking), and extra long-lived tracking metadata
added (contrasting with prior work using rewards when data
arrives [9], [36]) provide limited novelty. Secondly, in the
LLC prefetcher design, the arbitrator is incrementally novel,
10


Best
Program
7
8
3
12
5
10
13
6
2
14
4
11
Starting
Program
9
1
Fig. 14: Where ideas are distributed throughout the evolution.
since it is able to count how many unique steps occurred
in a time period for more accurate arbitration, compared to
prior works that use simple hit/miss thresholds [19]. These
changes generally emphasize the strengths of LLM tooling as
good synthesizers, combining multiple domains together, while
providing limited novelty.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have extended ArchAgent v1 towards
building and optimizing data prefetching algorithms in the
context of the Fourth Data Prefetching Competition. Through
both providing more hardware realizability area feedback and
decomposing the problem into a divide-and-conquer cascade,
we show that this ArchAgent v2 methodology is able to beat
human-derived, winning policies in the competition setting.
We show that this methodology is able to provide a 3.8%
increase in performance versus the competition baseline and
beat the existing state-of-the-art winner, BertiGO, by 0.3%.
Additionally, we analyze over 12,000 ideas from one of the
cascaded evolutions, describing the breadth of top ideas and
why they were impactful, giving a glimpse into how these
agentic evolutionary discovery tools explore the vast design
space. As AI, LLMs, and their harnesses for scientific discovery
improve, this work demonstrates one example of AI-augmented
computer architecture discovery.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Alameldeen and S. Pugsley. [Online]. Available: https://dpc3.compas.
cs.stonybrook.edu/
[2] A. R. Alameldeen and E. Rotenberg, “The first jilp data prefetching
championship (dpc-1).” [Online]. Available: https://jilp.org/dpc/
[3] Anonymous, “ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven computer architecture
discovery,” OpenReview Anonymous Preprint, 2025, submission Number
714. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=hcxN9l6zqZ
[4] Anthropic. [Online]. Available: https://claude.com/product/claude-code
[5] B. Asgari, T. D. Doudali, Q. Huang, A. Jain, G. Jeong, T. St. John,
P.
Panda,
S.
Pandey,
S.
Subramanian,
N.
J.
Yadwadkar,
and
A. Yazdanbakhsh, “Mlarchsys 2026 home.” [Online]. Available:
https://sites.google.com/corp/view/mlarchsys
[6] R. Bera, K. Kanellopoulos, and O. Mutlu, “Home.” [Online]. Available:
https://sites.google.com/corp/view/dpc4-2026/home?authuser=0
[7] R. Bera, K. Kanellopoulos, A. Nori, T. Shahroodi, S. Subramoney, and
O. Mutlu, “Pythia: A customizable hardware prefetching framework using
online reinforcement learning,” in MICRO-54: 54th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2021, pp. 1121–1137.
[8] A. Blasberg, V. Kypriotis, and D. Skarlatos, “Agentic architect: An agentic
ai framework for architecture design exploration and optimization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2604.25083, 2026.
[9] C. Block, G. Gerogiannis, and J. Torrellas, “Micro-mama: Multi-agent
reinforcement learning for multicore prefetching,” in Proceedings of
the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture,
ser. MICRO ’25.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2025, p. 884–898. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/3725843.3756096
[10] M. Cemri, M. Z. Pan, S. Yang, L. A. Agrawal, B. Chopra, R. Tiwari,
K. Keutzer, A. Parameswaran, D. Klein, K. Ramchandran et al., “Why do
multi-agent llm systems fail?” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 38, 2026.
[11] A. Cheng, S. Liu, M. Pan, Z. Li, B. Wang, A. Krentsel, T. Xia,
M. Cemri, J. Park, S. Yang, J. Chen, L. Agrawal, A. Desai, J. Xing,
K. Sen, M. Zaharia, and I. Stoica, “Barbarians at the gate: How ai is
upending systems research,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06189, 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06189
[12] A. Cui, F. Hermida-Rivera, J. Toubes, R. Gupta, J. Fang, C. L.
Zhang, E. Schwarz, J. Kim, Y. S. Shao, B. Nikolic, C. W. Fletcher,
and S. Karandikar, “Chia: An open-source framework for principled,
agentic ai-driven hardware/software co-design research,” 2026. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.27350
[13] N. Gober, G. Chacon, L. Wang, P. V. Gratz, D. A. Jimenez, E. Teran,
S. Pugsley, and J. Kim, “The championship simulator: Architectural sim-
ulation for education and competition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14324,
2022.
[14] Google. [Online]. Available: https://antigravity.google/
[15] ——, “Google workload traces version 2,” https://console.cloud.google.
com/storage/browser/external-traces-v2, accessed: 2025-11-13.
[16] R. Gupta, A. Jain, A. Gonzalez, A. Novikov, P.-S. Huang, M. Balog,
M. Eisenberger, S. Shirobokov, N. V˜u, M. Dixon et al., “Archagent:
Agentic ai-driven computer architecture discovery,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.22425, 2026.
[17] P. Hamadanian, P. Karimi, A. Nasr-Esfahany, K. Noorbakhsh, J. Chandler,
A. ParandehGheibi, M. Alizadeh, and H. Balakrishnan, “Glia: A
human-inspired ai for automated systems design and optimization,”
2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.27176
[18] Hparch. [Online]. Available: https://comparch-conf.gatech.edu/dpc2/
[19] A. Jain and C. Lin, “Linearizing irregular memory accesses for improved
correlated prefetching,” in Proceedings of the 46th Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture, ser. MICRO-46.
New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2013, p.
247–259. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2540708.2540730
[20] P. Karimi, K. Noorbakhsh, M. Alizadeh, and H. Balakrishnan,
“Improving coherence and persistence in agentic ai for system
optimization,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.21321
11


[21] R. T. Lange, Y. Imajuku, and E. Cetin, “Shinkaevolve: Towards
open-ended and sample-efficient program evolution,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.19349, 2025.
[22] S. Liu, M. Cemri, S. Agarwal, A. Krentsel, A. Naren, Q. Mang, Z. Li,
A. Gupta, M. Maheswaran, A. Cheng et al., “Skydiscover: A flexible,
adaptive framework for ai-driven scientific and algorithmic discovery,” in
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on AI and Agentic Systems, 2026,
pp. 1223–1227.
[23] R. Meng, B. Dalvi Mishra, J. Chen, C.-L. Li, P. Goyal, M. Parmar,
Y. Song, Y. Song, R. Sinha, P. Ranganathan, B. Gokturk, J. Yoon, and
T. Pfister, “Scientistone: Towards human-level autonomous research via
chain-of-evidence,” arXiv preprint, 2026.
[24] A. Mirhosseini and Y. Liu, “Ieee international conference on llm-aided
design, 2026.” [Online]. Available: https://iclad.ai/
[25] J.-B. Mouret and J. Clune, “Illuminating search spaces by mapping
elites,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.04909
[26] A. Navarro-Torres, B. Panda, J. Alastruey-Bened´e, P. Ib´a˜nez, V. Vi˜nals-
Y´ufera, and A. Ros, “Berti: an accurate local-delta data prefetcher,” in
2022 55th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 975–991.
[27] A. Navarro-Torres, S. Singh, B. Panda, and A. Ros, “The entangling
data prefetcher,” 4th Data Prefetching Championship, Feb. 2026.
[28] A. Novikov, N. V˜u, M. Eisenberger, E. Dupont, P.-S. Huang, A. Z.
Wagner, S. Shirobokov, B. Kozlovskii, F. J. R. Ruiz, A. Mehrabian,
M. P. Kumar, A. See, S. Chaudhuri, G. Holland, A. Davies, S. Nowozin,
P. Kohli, and M. Balog, “Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and
algorithmic discovery,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131
[29] OpenAI. [Online]. Available: https://chatgpt.com/codex/
[30] L. Peled, S. Mannor, U. Weiser, and Y. Etsion, “Semantic locality
and context-based prefetching using reinforcement learning,” in
Proceedings of the 42nd Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, ser. ISCA ’15.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2015, p. 285–297. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2749469.2749473
[31] N. Pelleriti, S. H. Nelaturu, Z. Zhou, Z. Li, M. Zimmer, B. Han,
and S. Pokutta, “What do evolutionary coding agents evolve?” 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20086
[32] G. Posluns and M. C. Jeffrey, “Global berti: Simultaneous streaming
and spatial prefetching,” 4th Data Prefetching Championship, Feb. 2026.
[33] B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, M. Balog, M. P.
Kumar, E. Dupont, F. J. R. Ruiz, J. S. Ellenberg, P. Wang, O. Fawzi,
P. Kohli, and A. Fawzi, “Mathematical discoveries from program search
with large language models.” Nat., vol. 625, no. 7995, pp. 468–475,
January 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/
nature/nature625.html#RomeraParedesBNBKDREWFKF24
[34] K.
Sankaralingam,
“Computer
architecture’s
alphazero
moment:
Automated discovery in an encircled world,” 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.03312
[35] A.
Sharma,
“Openevolve:
an
open-source
evolutionary
cod-
ing
agent,”
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/
algorithmicsuperintelligence/openevolve
[36] M. H. Siddiqui, F. Guzman, Y. Wu, and R. Ann, “Coordinated
reinforcement learning prefetching architecture for multicore systems,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.10719
[37] S. Singh, A. Torres, and A. Ros, “Pushing the limits of the berti prefetcher,”
4th Data Prefetching Championship (DPC4), 2026.
[38] SST and OpenCode Contributors, “Opencode: The open-source ai
coding agent,” 2026, accessed: 2026-07-31. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode
[39] R. Tanese, Distributed genetic algorithms for function optimization.
University of Michigan, 1989.
12
