Title: ARIADNE: Agentic Reward-Informed Adaptive Decision Exploration via Blackboard-Driven MCTS for Competitive Program Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02431v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 02:12:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# ARIADNE: Agentic Reward-Informed Adaptive Decision Exploration via Blackboard-Driven MCTS for Competitive Program Generation 

Minnan Wei a, ∗, Xiang Chen a, ∗, Xiaoshuai Niu a, Siyu Chen a

> aSchool of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Nantong University, Nantong, China

Abstract 

Competitive program generation aims to automatically produce correct and e ffi cient solutions for programming-contest problems under strict time and memory constraints. Existing LLM-based approaches often fail to perform explicit algorithmic planning and to handle edge cases robustly, leading to unreliable one-shot generation. Moreover, although execution feedback is essential for iter-ative debugging and refinement, incorporating such feedback e ff ectively within limited computational budgets remains di ffi cult. To overcome these limitations, we propose ARIADNE, a blackboard-driven Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) framework that models program generation as a sequential decision process. ARIADNE organizes the generation workflow into five coordinated stages (i.e., strategy selection, code generation, test generation, quality evaluation, and code repair) while maintaining a shared blackboard that accumulates structured evidence to guide subsequent decisions. Experiments on four benchmarks (APPS, CodeContests, Code-Contests +, and LiveCodeBench) show that ARIADNE consistently achieves the best Pass@1 performance across multiple LLM backends. With GPT-4o, ARIADNE attains Pass@1 scores of 41.30, 46.67, 27.27, and 20.91, surpassing the strongest baseline CodeSim by up to 26.06 points, while further improvements are observed with DeepSeek-V3.2. These results indicate that com-bining global search through MCTS with persistent evidence accumulation on a shared blackboard enables systematic exploration and e ff ective feedback utilization, substantially enhancing the capability of LLMs in competitive program generation. 

Keywords: Large Language Models; Competitive Programming; Monte Carlo Tree Search; Blackboard System; Program Generation 

1. Introduction 

Competitive program generation targets the automatic syn-thesis of correct and e ffi cient solutions to programming-contest problems under strict time /memory constraints and hidden test suites, making it a compelling benchmark for algorithmic rea-soning and practical code reliability. Despite strong general coding ability, Large Language Models (LLMs) still struggle in this setting because success often hinges on constructing ac-curate problem-solving strategies, including multi-step logical reasoning, explicit algorithmic planning, and comprehensive edge-case handling, that go beyond basic functional code gen-eration [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Prior work [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15] has explored sev-eral directions to improve LLMs on competitive program gen-eration, including iterative agent-style refinement, search-based exploration, and shared-workspace designs that externalize in-termediate artifacts for better context management. However, when used in isolation, these paradigms still leave critical gaps under contest constraints: agentic pipelines are often driven by pre-fixed workflows that limit adaptive decision-making; MCTS-based generation frequently lacks persistent and structured evi-dence reuse across branches; and blackboard systems typically            

> ∗Corresponding authors
> Email addresses: minnanvvei@gmail.com (Minnan Wei ),
> xchencs@ntu.edu.cn (Xiang Chen ), 2145290096@qq.com (Xiaoshuai Niu ), chensiyu043@gmail.com (Siyu Chen )

do not incorporate an explicit global planner to allocate search budget e ff ectively and recover from early suboptimal decisions. Existing paradigms leave the following practical gaps un-der contest constraints: (1) agentic pipelines often rely on pre-specified workflows that are brittle when early assumptions are wrong; (2) search-based generation may explore broadly but fails to accumulate and reuse structured evidence across branches; and (3) blackboard-style coordination stores artifacts, yet typi-cally lacks an explicit mechanism to prioritize actions and real-locate budget based on what has been learned so far. To address these gaps, we propose ARIADNE ( Agentic Reward-

Informed Adaptive Decisio N E xploration), a blackboard-driven MCTS framework for competitive program generation. ARI-ADNE views solution construction as iterative decision making over actions (i.e., strategy selection, code generation, test gen-eration, quality evaluation, and code repair) conditioned on a shared blackboard state. Specifically, Reward-Informed means that backpropagated rewards do not merely rank complete can-didates, but actively steer exploration toward decision points that are most likely to yield correctness and e ffi ciency under a limited budget. Meanwhile, Adaptive Decision means that structured diagnostics are written back to the blackboard and reused as persistent state, so subsequent expansions are condi-tioned on accumulated evidence rather than isolated rollouts. As a result, ARIADNE can (a) deviate from rigid agent work-flows when new evidence contradicts earlier plans, (b) reuse failure evidence to avoid repeating unproductive branches, and 

> arXiv:2605.02431v1 [cs.SE] 4 May 2026

(c) dynamically concentrate search on the most informative fixes and promising strategy alternatives. We first evaluate ARIADNE on four representative competitive-programming benchmarks (APPS [16], CodeContests [17], Code-Contests + [18], and LiveCodeBench [19]), which vary in prob-lem domains, di ffi culty, and evaluation protocols. We compare against three state-of-the-art agentic baselines, including Map-Coder [8], CodeSim [9], and CodeTree [20], and report Pass@1 together with runtime statistics. Across all benchmarks, ARI-ADNE consistently achieves the best Pass@1 in matched set-tings. For example, with GPT-4o, it reaches 41.3% in the APPS benchmark and reaches 46.67%, 27.27%, and 20.91% in Code-Contests, CodeContests +, and LiveCodeBench benchmarks, re-spectively. We then assess real contest performance using complete ICPC /CCPC-style multi-problem contest instances collected from Codeforces, including the 2025 ICPC Asia Shenyang Regional Contest and the 2025 CCPC Fujian Invitational. Under the same contest protocol and submission budgets, ARIADNE im-proves pass@k behavior and solved problem numbers over the best baseline from the benchmark comparison; for instance, on Shenyang Regional Contest, it attains pass@1 /3/5 of 3 /13, 6 /13, and 7 /13 (vs. 1 /13, 4 /13, and 5 /13), and on Fujian Regional Contest, it reaches 4 /13, 5 /13, and 7 /13 (vs. 2 /13, 2 /13, and 5/13). Our results indicate that competitive program generation benefits from explicit global planning over heterogeneous de-cisions (strategy selection, code synthesis, testing, and repair) rather than fixed agent pipelines. By coupling a persistent black-board state with reward-informed MCTS, ARIADNE can accu-mulate and reuse diagnostic evidence to steer exploration to-ward high-value solution trajectories. The main contributions of our study can be summarized as follows: 

• We propose ARIADNE, a blackboard-driven MCTS frame-work that performs reward-informed, adaptive decision exploration for competitive program generation, coordi-nating strategy selection, code generation, quality evalu-ation, and code repair within a unified search process. 

• We design a structured blackboard system and action space that enable evidence accumulation and reuse, allowing search to adapt its decisions based on execution feedback. 

• We conduct extensive evaluations on diverse benchmarks and realistic recent ICPC Regional Contests, demonstrat-ing consistent improvements over strong baselines. 

Open Science To enable the replication of our research, we share our dataset, source code, and detailed results on GitHub (https://github.com/minnanWei/ARIADNE ). 

Paper organization. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the background and motivation for reward-informed agentic search in competitive-program gen-eration. Section 3 presents ARIADNE, detailing the blackboard-driven framework, reward modeling, and the adaptive decision exploration procedure based on MCTS. Section 4 describes the experimental setup, including research questions, datasets, base-lines, metrics, and implementation details. Section 5 reports the experimental results and key findings on benchmark tasks and full-contest evaluations. Section 6 further discusses generaliza-tion across di ff erent LLM backbones, e ffi ciency statistics (e.g., token usage and execution cost), and threats to validity. Sec-tion 7 reviews related work and highlights the novelty of our study. Section 8 concludes the paper and outlines future re-search directions. 

2. Research Background and Research Motivation 

2.1. Competitive Program Generation 

Competitive program generation seeks to automatically pro-duce correct and e ffi cient solutions for algorithmic problems drawn from programming contests. Unlike general-purpose code generation, these tasks demand explicit algorithmic strategy se-lection, multi-step reasoning, strict time and memory constraints, and thorough handling of edge cases. To support rigorous evaluation, recent benchmarks empha-size both algorithmic diversity and execution-level correctness. ProBench [21] compiles real contest problems annotated with algorithm tags and di ffi culty levels. TACO [22] provides large-scale datasets with fine-grained topic and skill annotations. Code-Contests + [18] enhances evaluation fidelity through high-quality test-case generation, while COMPASS [23] introduces multi-dimensional metrics encompassing correctness, e ffi ciency, and code quality. 

2.2. Monte Carlo Tree Search for Code Generation 

MCTS (Monte Carlo Tree Search) is a search algorithm for sequential decision-making under uncertainty, which balances exploration and exploitation through iterative selection, expan-sion, simulation, and backpropagation. Its principled manage-ment of this trade-o ff makes MCTS particularly well-suited for reasoning over large combinatorial decision spaces. Recent work has explored integrating MCTS with LLMs to enhance reasoning and code generation. TreeMind [12] ap-plies MCTS to explore UI interaction sequences for bug repro-duction, while VeriGen +MCTS [13] leverages MCTS to guide RTL code generation under functional and PPA constraints. These studies illustrate that MCTS can serve as an e ff ective global planner for complex software engineering tasks. 

2.3. Blackboard System 

Blackboard systems provide a coordination architecture for multi-agent and multi-knowledge-source systems, in which agents interact indirectly through a shared, structured workspace rather than via direct communication. Rather than functioning as sim-ple shared memory, a blackboard incrementally accumulates in-termediate hypotheses, constraints, and partial results, making them available to all agents as a common foundation for subse-quent reasoning and action. This paradigm has been widely adopted to facilitate col-laboration among heterogeneous agents in complex decision-making settings. Early work [24] employed a blackboard-based 2open-tender mechanism for collaborative negotiation, where mul-tiple agents submit competing proposals and constraints to a shared workspace. In robotics and control systems, blackboard architectures have been used to integrate perception, planning, and execution agents around a shared world model, enabling coordinated behavior without tight coupling between modules. More recently, blackboard systems have been revisited in the context of LLM-based multi-agent systems. Han et al. [14] demonstrate that externalizing intermediate reasoning artifacts to a blackboard mitigates information fragmentation in multi-agent LLM collaboration and supports dynamic selection of subsequent actions. Similarly, Salemi et al. [15] show that blackboard-mediated coordination allows agents to self-select and contribute based on the evolving shared state, enhancing both flexibility and scalability. 

2.4. Research Motivation 

By analyzing the previous studies [21, 22, 18, 23, 12, 13, 24, 14, 15], we identify the following three key limitations. 

Limitation 1: Insu ffi ciency of one-shot prompting. Stud-ies such as Wei et al. [25] and LLM-ProS [1] indicate that only a limited portion of contest problems can be solved using basic prompting. A key reason is that competitive program genera-tion is not a simple mapping from problem description to code implementation. Instead, it requires (1) committing to an algo-rithmic strategy under strict complexity constraints, (2) trans-lating that strategy into a correct implementation, and (3) it-eratively correcting subtle failures revealed through execution. Without an explicit mechanism for hypothesis revision and test-driven refinement, one-shot generation tends to overfit to super-ficial patterns in the problem statement and fails to systemati-cally recover from early incorrect decisions. 

Limitation 2: Single-trajectory nature of MCTS-based generation. Existing approaches [11, 12, 13] that apply MCTS to code generation typically operate along a single reasoning process or generation trajectory. Therefore, the search tends to explore variations of a dominant draft or a single chain of in-termediate reasoning, rather than coordinating specialized ca-pabilities (such as strategy analysis, targeted test synthesis, and evidence-driven repair). In addition, intermediate artifacts are often treated as temporary outputs rather than a persistent state, which limits cross-branch knowledge transfer and diminishes exploration e ffi ciency in large program spaces where failures frequently exhibit recurring patterns. 

Limitation 3: Absence of an explicit global planner in blackboard coordination. While blackboard systems facili-tate information sharing and coordination among agents [24, 14, 15], the evolution of the shared workspace is often governed by fixed workflows, local heuristics, or reactive triggering rules. In such settings, agents may contribute useful artifacts, but there is no principled mechanism for allocating search budget across competing strategy hypotheses, balancing exploration and ex-ploitation, or systematically revisiting earlier decisions in light of new evidence. As a result, the system can become path-dependent: early suboptimal strategy commitments or prema-ture repairs may dominate subsequent steps, constraining the exploration of alternative solution directions and reducing ro-bustness on challenging contest problems. 

3. Our Proposed Framework ARIADNE 

In this section, we present ARIADNE, a blackboard-driven MCTS framework for competitive program generation. The primary goal of ARIADNE is to systematically explore the so-lution space and progressively converge to an optimal program for a given algorithmic problem, by coupling search-based plan-ning with modular agent execution and a blackboard system that maintains structured shared knowledge across steps and branches. Rather than treating code generation as a one-shot synthesis problem, ARIADNE models competitive program-ming as a sequential decision-making process, where partial solutions are iteratively generated, evaluated, repaired, and re-fined under explicit correctness constraints. The framework comprises three key components: 

• MCTS : which functions as a global planner that selects among competitive program drafts via a UCB-guided tree policy, balancing exploration and exploitation, and shift-ing the search toward branches with higher estimated value as the node statistics p(u) are updated through backprop-agation; 

• Modular agents , which execute concrete actions such as code generation, quality evaluation, test generation, and code repair, thereby enabling diverse solution attempts beyond a single draft; 

• A blackboard system , which maintains a structured shared workspace for intermediate constraints, tests, and other artifacts, enabling information to persist and be system-atically reused throughout the search process. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture of ARIADNE. Given a competitive programming problem, the system initial-izes a set of blackboard, constructs an MCTS search tree, and it-eratively improves program drafts through agent-driven actions guided by MCTS. At each iteration, agents read from and write to the blackboard, allowing quality evaluation feedback to accu-mulate and inform subsequent expansions. This coupling turns refinement and repair into first-class transitions in the search process, while the global planner prioritizes promising direc-tions without committing irrevocably to early choices. 

3.1. Problem Formulation as Search 

In this study, we model competitive program generation as a tree search problem over the space of program drafts aug-mented with shared intermediate artifacts. We next introduce the relevant definitions. 

Definition 1 (Problem Instance) . A problem instance is x, in-cluding the statement, I /O specification, constraints, and sample tests. 3Figure 1: Overview of ARIADNE: Illustration of all state-transition actions, including Strategy Selection, Code Generation, Evaluation, and Patch Application. 

Definition 2 (State) . A state at step t is st = (ct, Bt), where ct is the current program draft and Bt is a blackboard that stores in-termediate artifacts (e.g., parsed constraints, solution hypothe-ses, counterexamples, and repair notes). 

Definition 3 (Action) . An action at ∈ A (st) specifies a state transition applied to the current state st = (ct, Bt) and induces a transition st+1 = T (st, at). We define the action space as a union of five action families: 

A(st) = Astr (st) ∪ A gen (st) ∪ A test (st) ∪ A eval (st) ∪ A patch (st).

(1) where 

• Strategy Selection Actions (Astr ): activate, rank, or re-fine algorithmic strategy hypotheses stored on the black-board. 

• Code Generation Actions (Agen ): synthesize or revise candidate implementations under the selected strategy and blackboard context, producing an updated draft ct+1.

• Test Generation Actions (Atest ): construct discrimina-tive tests and counterexamples to improve screening and failure localization, updating the shared test /evidence en-tries in B.

• Quality Evaluation Actions (Aeval ): assess candidate drafts through staged testing /analysis, producing a scalar reward and structured diagnostics that update B.

• Patch Application Actions (Apatch ): apply structured re-pairs or targeted modifications to obtain a patched pro-gram ct+1, together with repair-related blackboard updates. Each action is instantiated by invoking its corresponding agents. 

Definition 4 (Transition) . Executing at produces a successor node st+1 = T (st, at) = (ct+1, Bt+1), where the program draft and blackboard are updated according to the action outcome. 

Definition 5 (Value) . We define a value function V(st) that quantifies the quality of the current draft, primarily based on correctness, and optionally incorporating e ffi ciency and code quality metrics. For non-terminal drafts, we compute a scalar reward R as a weighted combination of these signals: 

R = αRcorr + βRperf + γRstruct (2) where Rcorr is a correctness-related signal (dominated by test outcomes), and Rperf and Rstruct measure e ffi ciency and code quality, respectively. In our experiments, we set α = 0.6 and 

β = γ = 0.2 1. The evaluation additionally produces structured feedback, such as failing test cases and repair hints, which is recorded in B to guide subsequent actions.    

> 1We assign a larger weight to αto prioritize functional correctness in the reward. In particular, the test-based correctness signal serves as the primary gate: a draft that passes the evaluation tests is treated as “passed", whereas a draft that fails any test is treated as “failed".

4Given the above definitions, program generation can be for-mulated as a sequential decision process. Starting from an ini-tial state s0 = (c0, B0), consisting of an empty code draft and an initialized blackboard, the algorithm repeatedly selects an action at from the action space A(st). It applies it to obtain a refined draft ct+1 and updated artifacts Bt+1 on related black-boards. The goal is to identify a final solution program psol that is functionally correct and, ideally, e ffi cient within a bounded computational budget. This formulation naturally motivates the use of tree search methods to balance exploration of diverse so-lution hypotheses with exploitation of high-value partial drafts. 

Definition 6 (Terminal Condition) . A node is considered termi-nal if the current program passes all tests under the evaluation protocol or if the search budget is exhausted. In either case, the final draft cm is treated as the solution program for the problem and is denoted by psol .

3.2. Monte Carlo Tree Search as Global Planner 

To navigate the search space, we employ MCTS, a tree-based planning algorithm that incrementally constructs a search tree. Each node represents a state s = (c, B), with edges cor-responding to actions a ∈ A (s). MCTS explores the space through four canonical phases: selection, expansion, simula-tion, and backpropagation. Given the search formulation in Section 3.1, MCTS serves as a global planner that selects high-level actions a ∈ A (s) over states s = (c, B), where c is the current program draft and B is the blackboard. Each MCTS iteration follows the four canoni-cal phases, while being adapted to competitive program gener-ation: quality evaluation actions aeval ∈ A eval (s) are executed in the simulation /evaluation phase to produce both a scalar reward 

R for backpropagation and structured diagnostics to update the blackboard B. The detailed procedure is shown in Algorithm 1. 

3.2.1. Selection 

Starting from the root state s0, MCTS repeatedly selects a child node until reaching a node that is not fully expanded or is terminal. For each child u of a node v, we compute the UCB score: 

UCB (u) = ¯X(u) + C

s

ln( N(v) + 1) 

N(u) , (3) where N(·) and ¯ X(·) denote visit counts and empirical mean val-ues of the current node, and C governs the trade-o ff between exploration and exploitation. We sample the next node from a softmax distribution over UCB scores with temperature τ:

p(u) = exp  (UCB (u) − max w UCB (w)) /τ Pk exp  (UCB (k) − max w UCB (w)) /τ  . (4) Here, p(u) assigns higher probability to children with larger 

UCB (u), while the temperature τ controls the sharpness of the selection distribution (i.e., smaller τ yields greedier choices, larger τ encourages more exploration). Subtracting max w UCB (w)

Algorithm 1: Blackboard-Driven MCTS for Compet-itive Program Generation 

Input: problem instance x; iteration budget Kmax ; UCB coe ffi cient C; temperature τ; reward weights (α, β, γ )

Output: solution program psol if found; otherwise best draft cbest  

> 1

Initialize root state.  

> 2

c0 ← ∅; 

> 3

BPM ← BuildProblemModel (x);  

> 4

BS H ← ∅ BCT ← ∅ BPR ← ∅; 

> 5

B0 ← (BPM , BS H , BCT , BPR );  

> 6

s0 ← (c0, B0);  

> 7

v0 ← NewNode (s0);  

> 8

cbest ← c0; Rbest ← −∞ ;

// Each node x maintains N(x) and ¯X(x). 

> 9

for k ← 1 to Kmax do  

> 10

v ← v0; 

> 11

π ← ⟨ v0⟩; 

> 12

while v is fully expanded and non-terminal do 

// For child u ∈ Child( v):

UCB (u) = ¯X(u) + C

s

ln( N(v)) + 1

N(u)

// Pick u⋆ = arg max u∈Child( v) UCB (u), or sample u⋆ via softmax over 

{UCB (u)} with temperature τ. 

> 13

v ← u⋆; 

> 14

π ← π ∥ ⟨ v⟩; 

> 15

s ← S tate (v) ; // s = (c, B) 

> 16

(R, diag , solved ) ←

Evaluate (c, BPM , BCT ; α, β, γ );  

> 17

if solved then  

> 18

return psol ← c; 

> 19

B ← WriteBack (B, diag );  

> 20

s ← (c, B);  

> 21

if R > Rbest then  

> 22

Rbest ← R; 

> 23

cbest ← c; 

> 24

A ← A str (s) ∪ A gen (s) ∪ A test (s) ∪ A patch (s);  

> 25

foreach a ∈ S electS ubset (A) do  

> 26

s′ ← T (s, a) ; // s′ = (c′, B′) 

> 27

AddChild( v, NewNode (s′));  

> 28

foreach x ∈ π do  

> 29

N(x) ← N(x) + 1;  

> 30

¯X(x) ← (N(x) − 1) ¯ X(x) + RN(x) ; 

> 31

return cbest ;5Select  Expansion Simulation ＆Evaluation  Backpropagation 

Iteration      

> Select nodes according to
> S1S2Sk
> ...... c1c2c3
> ......

## 1 2 3

# MCTS 

# Module    

> 0.4 0.3 0.3
> 0.7
> Lightweight quick screening
> Multiple evaluation dimensions
> scoring: 0.6 ~ 1.0
> scoring: 0.0 ~ 0.6
> correctness
> performance
> code structure
> α
> β
> γ
> Comprehensive screening
> 1.0
> 0.3
> Structuring failed metadata

## 4Figure 2: Overview of the MCTS pipeline serving as a global planner, orchestrating agent actions through selection, expansion, simulation and evaluation, and backpropagation. 

is a standard numerical-stability technique that does not alter the resulting distribution [11]. This stochastic selection miti-gates over-commitment to a single branch and promotes diver-sified search trajectories, which is especially important when early feedback is noisy and multiple strategy hypotheses remain plausible. 

3.2.2. Simulation and Evaluation 

Given a selected node with state s = (c, B), the current pro-gram draft c is evaluated using a two-stage protocol to compute the node value and to extract diagnostic artifacts for updating the blackboard. 

Two-stage evaluation. We first perform a lightweight screen-ing to filter out clearly invalid candidates and obtain coarse di-agnostic information. If the draft passes this stage, a deeper evaluation is conducted using a more comprehensive test suite, with sandboxed execution applied when appropriate. A draft is considered a solution program psol if it successfully passes the deep evaluation. 

Reward computation. For non-terminal drafts, we compute a scalar reward R as a weighted combination of signals, fol-lowing the value function V(s) defined in Section 3.1. We set 

α = 0.6 and β = γ = 0.2 to make correctness the domi-nant driver of value estimates while still allowing e ffi ciency and code-quality signals to break ties among drafts with similar test performance. In particular, when a draft achieves partial cor-rectness but fails on specific counterexamples, the reward re-mains informative and encourages repair-focused actions that address the observed failures. Conversely, when correctness signals remain persistently low across attempts, the value esti-mates for the corresponding branches stay suppressed, prompt-ing the search to explore alternative strategy branches rather than continuing local repairs. The evaluation additionally pro-duces structured feedback, such as failing test cases and repair hints, which is recorded in B to guide subsequent action selec-tion and state updates. 

Reward computation. For non-terminal drafts, we compute a scalar reward R as a weighted combination of signals, following the value function V(s) defined in Section 3.1. The evaluation additionally produces structured feedback, such as failing test cases and repair hints, which is recorded in B to guide subse-quent action selection and state updates. 

3.2.3. Expansion 

Unlike the canonical MCTS pipeline, which performs ex-pansion before simulation, we conduct simulation and eval-uation before expansion. Within the MCTS module, evalua-tion produces actionable artifacts that update the blackboard B,thereby influencing which actions a ∈ A (s) are meaningful. Consequently, after evaluating a selected node, we enumerate high-level actions conditioned on the blackboard and apply a subset of them to generate successor states s′ = (c′, B′), which are then added as child nodes. 

3.2.4. Backpropagation 

After obtaining the reward R from evaluation, it is back-propagated along the selected path to update visit counts and value estimates: 

N(x) ← N(x) + 1, ¯X(x) ← (N(x) − 1) ¯ X(x) + RN(x) , (5) for every node x along the trajectory. These statistics are subse-quently utilized by the UCB rule in Eq. 3 to guide future action selection. 

3.3. Agent Design 

Competitive program generation is inherently iterative: a solver should (i) propose multiple candidate algorithmic strate-gies, (ii) implement the selected strategy as an executable pro-gram, (iii) validate correctness by running targeted test cases, and (iv) repair failures based on concrete evidence. Under our 6Strategy Analysis Agent  

> Proposes multiple candidate solution strategies for the problem.
> Code Generation Agent
> Generates executable candidate code conditioned on chosen strategy hypothesis.
> Test Generation Agent
> Produces discriminative tests and minimized counterexamples from constraints.
> Scoring Agent
> Evaluates candidates, assigns rewards, and writes diagnostics for repair.
> Code Repair Agent
> Synthesizes constrained patches from failures and updates repair blackboard.
> Problem Model Blackboard
> Strategy Hypothesis Blackboard
> Counterexample &
> Tests Blackboard
> Patch & Repair
> Blackboard
> WRITE IN
> READ Figure 3: Overview of agent–blackboard information exchange, where agents read structured entries from the blackboard and write back reusable artifacts that guide subsequent search actions.

search formulation, each MCTS node corresponds to a state s =

(c, B), consisting of a program draft c and a shared blackboard 

B, where each tree edge corresponds to an action a ∈ A (s) that transforms the state according to s′ = T (s, a). The action space 

A(s) is implemented via a set of specialized agents. Each agent instantiates a specific space of actions within 

A(s) according to a fixed interaction contract: it reads struc-tured entries from designated blackboard components, performs a bounded reasoning or synthesis procedure, and writes back reusable artifacts. This design renders the search evidence-driven: quality evaluation actions not only produce a scalar reward R for backpropagation but also generate structured di-agnostics that update B, thereby conditioning subsequent gen-eration and repair actions. Figure 3 illustrates the resulting closed-loop information flow, and the full prompt templates for all agents are provided in Appendix A. 

3.3.1. Strategy Analysis Agent 

The Strategy Analysis Agent Astr instantiates strategy se-lection actions astr ∈ A str (s). Given a state s = (c, B), it reads the structured task specification from the Problem Model Blackboard and proposes a set of algorithmic strategy hypothe-ses. Each hypothesis is associated with an estimated utility, such as expected correctness likelihood and computational cost, forming a strategy prior that is recorded on the Strategy Hypoth-esis Blackboard. This prior subsequently conditions actions in 

Agen (s) and Apatch (s), biasing the search toward promising al-gorithmic trajectories. The full prompt templates are shown in Appendix A.1. 

3.3.2. Code Generation Agent 

The Code Generation Agent Agen instantiates code genera-tion actions agen ∈ A gen (s). It reads the active strategy hypoth-esis and the problem model from B to produce an updated draft program c′. Formally, it realizes the transition T  (c, B), agen 

= (c′, B′), where B′ records the strategy commitment metadata for attribution and subsequent hypothesis refinement. The full prompt templates are shown in Appendix A.2. 

3.3.3. Test Generation Agent 

The Test Generation Agent Atest instantiates test construc-tion actions atest ∈ A test (s). It reads constraints and invariants from the Problem Model Blackboard, as well as accumulated evidence (tests and counterexamples) from the Counterexample & Tests Blackboard, and generates a prioritized test set within a constrained execution budget. The resulting transition updates 

B by adding discriminative tests and minimizing counterexam-ples, thereby improving screening e ffi ciency and failure local-ization for subsequent evaluation and repair. The full prompt templates are shown in Appendix A.3. 

3.3.4. Scoring Agent 

The Scoring Agent Aeval instantiates quality evaluation ac-tions aeval ∈ A eval (s) and serves as the concrete implementation of the value and reward definitions. Given a candidate draft 

c and the blackboard context B, it performs staged testing us-ing the curated test pool and produces (i) a scalar reward R for MCTS backpropagation and (ii) structured diagnostics such as 7failing inputs, violated conditions, and error traces. The diag-nostics are written back to the Counterexample & Tests Black-board and the Patch & Repair Blackboard, enabling the reuse of evaluation evidence across search branches. The full prompt templates are shown in Appendix A.4. 

3.3.5. Code Repair Agent 

The Code Repair Agent Apatch instantiates patch applica-tion actions apatch ∈ A patch (s). It reads failure evidence from the Counterexample & Tests Blackboard and repair-related sig-nals from the Patch & Repair Blackboard, and then proposes constrained patch objects characterized by applicability condi-tions and compatibility constraints. During expansion, the coor-dinator selects compatible patches and applies them to produce repaired drafts c′, resulting in transitions of the form T  (c, B), apatch 

= (c′, B′), where B′ records the applied patch and the updated repair state. The full prompt templates are shown in Appendix A.5. 

3.4. Blackboard System 

Competitive program generation di ff ers from standard one-shot code synthesis in two fundamental aspects: (i) correctness is primarily verified through test-driven evidence rather than purely textual reasoning, and (ii) the solution process is inher-ently iterative, alternating among strategy proposal, code gen-eration, testing, and repair. Under our search formulation, each node state is represented as s = (c, B), where c denotes the cur-rent program draft and B represents a shared blackboard. The introduction of the blackboard serves two purposes. First, it provides a persistent and structured workspace that accumulates constraints, hypotheses, counterexamples, and repair cues dis-covered during search, preventing intermediate artifacts from being discarded between rollouts. Second, it facilitates cross-branch reuse: evidence generated during the evaluation of one draft (e.g., a failing input) can directly inform subsequent ac-tions applied to other drafts, thereby reducing redundant explo-ration and accelerating convergence toward a correct solution. We further decompose B into multiple dedicated compo-nents, as the intermediate artifacts in competitive programs are heterogeneous and exhibit di ff erent lifecycles and access pat-terns. For instance, the normalized problem semantics should remain stable once constructed, whereas failure evidence and repair suggestions evolve continuously as the search explores new drafts. Storing these artifacts in an unstructured mem-ory would lead to inconsistent interpretations, redundant in-formation, and ine ff ective conditioning of actions. To address this, we organize the blackboard into four components, B =

(BPM , BS H , BCT , BPR ), each aligned with a distinct stage of the generate–test–repair loop and directly consumed by the corre-sponding action families in A(s). Figure 4 illustrates this orga-nization and the information flow among components. 

3.4.1. Problem Model Blackboard 

(BPM )The Problem Model Blackboard BPM provides a stable and structured representation of the problem instance, serving as the shared semantic reference for all actions. Its primary function is It transforms the natural-language problem description into a stable, structured, and actionable representation. It serves as the unified factual benchmark that downstream reasoning and code generation rely on. 

> Problem Model Blackboard
> Strategy Hypothesis Blackboard
> Counterexample & Tests Blackboard
> Patch & Repair Blackboard
> It maintains multiple competing algorithmic strategy hypotheses as structured objects. It stores the information needed for feasibility assessment and search guidance for each hypothesis.
> It records and reuses high-value test cases and failure evidence discovered during search. It reduces redundant evaluations and supports more informed decisions in later evaluations.
> It organizes candidate code modifications as first-class patch objects to support systematic repair. It enables principled selection and composition of repairs by enforcing patch constraints and compatibility.
> Figure 4: Structural organization of the blackboard system in ARIADNE.

to translate the natural-language problem statement into canon-ical fields that can be directly consumed by strategy selection (Astr ), code generation ( Agen ), test generation ( Atest ), evalua-tion ( Aeval ), and repair ( Apatch ). 

Canonical fields. BPM stores four categories of structured en-tries: 

• Constraints: explicit specifications of input ranges and resource limits (e.g., time and memory). 

• Objective specification: a normalized description of the required output behavior and optimization objectives, if applicable. 

• Required invariants: semantic properties that any cor-rect solution must satisfy and preserve. 

• Edge-case checklist: a systematically enumerated set of boundary and degenerate cases used to ensure robustness. 

Normalization. To ensure consistency across search branches, the extracted entries are canonicalized into a non-redundant form by normalizing numeric formats, range expressions, variable names, and equivalent constraints. This canonicalization pre-vents duplicated or inconsistent interpretations of the problem and enables downstream actions to operate on a unified seman-tic reference. 

Usage in search. By centralizing constraints, invariants, and edge cases within BPM , the search process reduces unnecessary exploration. Invalid strategy hypotheses can be deprioritized early, generated code can be verified against explicit require-ments, and test generation can systematically target boundary conditions. This design enhances both the e ffi ciency of the search and the reliability of the generated programs. 83.4.2. Strategy Hypothesis Blackboard 

(BS H )The Strategy Hypothesis Blackboard BS H maintains mul-tiple competing strategy hypotheses as structured artifacts, en-abling strategy selection to be explored dynamically during the search rather than fixed a priori. It is primarily produced by strategy selection actions ( Astr ) and consumed by code genera-tion actions Agen and repair actions Apatch . In addition, BS H can materialize a lightweight requirements document derived from 

BPM , which summarizes problem constraints, target invariants, edge cases, and performance requirements. This document is provided to the Strategy Analysis Agent, which generates mul-tiple diverse candidate strategies (e.g., alternative algorithmic paradigms or proof sketches) rather than a single committed plan. The resulting strategies are written back to BS H as com-peting hypotheses to be explored and refined throughout the search process. 

Stored hypothesis structure. Each strategy hypothesis is stored along with: (1) applicability conditions derived from BPM ; (2) an estimated upper bound on time and memory complexity; (3) risk annotations indicating likely failure modes (e.g., TLE, overflow, o ff -by-one errors); and (4) a concise rationale linked to the required invariants from BPM .

Prioritization for search. When multiple hypotheses coexist, 

BS H stores normalized priority weights (priors) to bias action selection toward more promising strategy directions. Specifi-cally, BS H ranks strategies according to a predefined set of cri-teria (e.g., feasibility under constraints from BPM , asymptotic complexity bounds, implementation di ffi culty, and estimated risk), and converts this ranking into priors that guide subsequent action choices. These weights are dynamically updated as qual-ity evaluation actions ( Aeval ) generate new evidence supporting or contradicting the current hypothesis set. Through this mech-anism, nodes derived from higher-ranked strategies are more likely to achieve superior empirical returns during evaluation and, consequently, receive higher node values via backpropaga-tion, further increasing their selection probability in later search iterations. 

3.4.3. Counterexample & Tests Blackboard 

(BCT )The Counterexample & Tests Blackboard BCT records reusable test artifacts and failure evidence discovered during the search. In competitive programming, tests provide the most direct and discriminative feedback for distinguishing correct implemen-tations from plausible but incorrect ones. By persisting high-impact tests and counterexamples in BCT , the system avoids re-peatedly rediscovering the same failure modes across di ff erent search branches. 

Stored artifacts. BCT stores: (1) generated stress tests and boundary inputs derived from BPM ; (2) failing inputs (coun-terexamples) and their minimized forms; and (3) structured fail-ure descriptors, such as WA, RE, or TLE patterns and associ-ated execution traces when available. 

Integration with evaluation. Quality evaluation actions ( Aeval )consult BCT to perform low-cost screening and to identify dis-criminative counterexamples. Newly discovered failures are written back to BCT , thereby making subsequent evaluations both more e ffi cient and more informative. 

3.4.4. Patch & Repair Blackboard 

(BPR )The Patch & Repair Blackboard BPR organizes repair sug-gestions as structured artifacts that can be reused and com-posed throughout the search. It is primarily produced by re-pair actions ( Apatch ) based on failure evidence from BCT and constraints /invariants from BPM , and it constrains the repair-related portion of the action space during expansion. In com-petitive program generation, many failures are not resolved by regenerating code from scratch; instead, they require targeted modifications guided by concrete counterexamples. By storing repairs as explicit objects, BPR enables the search to systemati-cally explore repair trajectories rather than performing ad hoc mutations. 

Patch representation. Each entry on BPR corresponds to a can-didate patch represented independently of any specific code in-stance, and is annotated with: (1) the targeted failure pattern linked to BCT ; (2) applicability conditions derived from BPM ;and (3) the expected e ff ect on the program draft. To reflect di ff erent modification scopes and associated costs, patches are organized into three granularity levels: 

• L1 (Local Repairs): Small, low-cost edits that correct localized implementation issues (e.g., boundary handling or indexing errors) without altering the overall program structure. 

• L2 (Structural Repairs): Medium-scale refactorings that preserve the algorithmic strategy but modify internal or-ganization (e.g., changing data structures or loop con-structs). 

• L3 (Strategy Repairs): High-level modifications that re-vise or replace the underlying strategy hypothesis (e.g., switching to an alternative hypothesis stored in BS H ). 

Compatibility constraints. To prevent incoherent repair com-positions, BPR maintains metadata indicating when patches are incompatible or when one patch should precede another. Specif-ically, each patch may include: (1) a set of preconditions (e.g., an overflow-related diagnostic must be present); (2) a conflict set of mutually exclusive patches (e.g., incompatible indexing conventions); and (3) ordering constraints for prerequisite trans-formations (e.g., preprocessing must be applied before a depen-dent data-structure modification). During expansion, repair ac-tions are filtered according to these constraints, ensuring that MCTS explores only valid repair combinations. 

Role in search transitions. Applying a patch corresponds to executing an action apatch ∈ A patch (s), which produces a tran-sition T (( c, B), apatch ) = (c′, B′). The applied patch and its as-sociated metadata are recorded back into BPR , while newly ob-served outcomes (e.g., whether a counterexample is resolved) are written into BCT . By storing repair artifacts in BPR and conditioning expansion on their applicability, the system en-ables evidence-driven refinement of code drafts while keeping the repair search space tractable. 94. Experimental Setup 

4.1. Research Questions 

To systematically evaluate the e ff ectiveness of our proposed approach, we design the following four research questions (RQs) to guide our empirical evaluation. 

RQ1: Does our proposed approach outperform baseline methods on competitive program generation? Design Motivation. Previous multi-agent code generation frameworks [8, 9, 12, 10, 20, 26, 27] exhibit two primary limi-tations: (1) their workflows are often fixed, with agents invoked in a predetermined linear sequence, lacking dynamic decision-making and global coordination informed by intermediate re-sults; and (2) they focus primarily on generating syntactically plausible code or satisfying simple checks, rather than system-atically exploring and optimizing within a structured solution space. To conduct a comprehensive assessment, we compared our method against four state-of-the-art baselines. Specifically, MapCoder [8] simulates step-by-step human reasoning to coor-dinate agent collaboration for final code generation. CodeSim [9] employs a three-stage pipeline with an adaptive loop of plan-ning, generation, and refinement. CodeTree [20] organizes gen-eration and evaluation in a tree structure, expanding or pruning branches based on execution feedback until convergence. 

RQ2: Does the MCTS-based strategy in our framework enable more e ff ective exploration than alternative search strategies? Design Motivation. For search tasks within a large-scale solution space, alternative strategies such as Breadth-First Search (BFS), Depth-First Search (DFS), and greedy heuristics can also traverse candidate solutions according to their respective search logic. However, these strategies often struggle to bal-ance exploration and exploitation e ff ectively: they may either explore too narrowly, missing promising regions of the solu-tion space, or explore too broadly, incurring high computational cost without su ffi cient guidance. In this RQ, we aim to perform a comparative ablation study to evaluate whether the MCTS-based strategy in our framework enables more e ff ective explo-ration than these alternatives, in terms of solution quality, search effi ciency, and robustness, while operating under the same blackboard-driven agent architecture. 

RQ3: How do the key hyperparameters in MCTS in-fluence program generation performance and search e ffi -ciency? Design Motivation. The performance of MCTS is highly sensitive to its key hyperparameters. Limiting the maximum search depth helps control computational resources, but a depth that is too shallow may fail to explore complex repair sequences, whereas an excessively deep tree can lead to a combinatorial ex-plosion and waste resources on unproductive paths. Similarly, the exploration–exploitation balance, governed by the UCB co-effi cient ( C) and the temperature hyperparameter ( τ) used in probabilistic action selection, critically a ff ects search behavior: improper tuning can cause premature convergence to local op-tima or ine ffi cient wandering in low-quality regions. Therefore, we aim to quantitatively evaluate the sensitivity of these hyper-parameters and identify configurations that optimize both per-formance and e ffi ciency for competitive program generation, providing empirical guidance for tuning ARIADNE in practi-cal deployments. 

RQ4: How e ff ective is our proposed approach under re-alistic competitive programming contests? Design Motivation. While controlled benchmarks provide a useful means for evaluating algorithmic correctness and rel-ative performance, they do not fully capture the challenges en-countered in real competitive programming contests. In prac-tice, solutions must be developed under strict time constraints, limited computational resources, and incomplete feedback, while generalizing across a diverse set of problem types. Human com-petitors must continuously balance solution quality, implemen-tation e ffi ciency, and time management, making competitive programming a fundamentally dynamic and resource-constrained setting. To evaluate whether our proposed approach can operate eff ectively in such realistic contests, we assess its performance under constrained time budgets, varying problem di ffi culties, and limited interaction opportunities, comparing it against both human-level and automated baselines. Beyond absolute success rates, we consider multiple performance dimensions, including solution correctness, computational cost, and resource utiliza-tion. 

4.2. Experimental Subjects 

To address the first three research questions, we evaluate our approach on four representative competitive programming benchmarks, encompassing diverse problem domains, di ffi culty levels, and evaluation protocols. 

• CodeContests [17] is a large-scale benchmark compris-ing competitive programming problems collected from multiple online judges, each paired with executable test cases for automatic evaluation. It provides a standardized setting for assessing algorithmic reasoning across a wide range of classical programming tasks. 

• CodeContests + [18] extends CodeContests by replacing the original test suites with higher-quality, automatically generated and validated tests. This enhanced version im-proves the reliability of correctness evaluation and miti-gates false positives arising from insu ffi cient or weak test coverage. 

• APPS [16] is a large-scale program synthesis benchmark encompassing problems of varying di ffi culty, from intro-ductory exercises to complex algorithmic challenges. So-lutions are evaluated through executable test cases, mak-ing it a widely adopted benchmark for general-purpose code generation capability. 

• LiveCodeBench [19] aims to provide a more compre-hensive and contamination-free assessment of coding ca-pabilities by continuously collecting newly released prob-lems from periodic contests on major competitive-programming platforms. 10 To address RQ4 , we evaluate our approach under realis-tic competitive programming conditions using complete con-test instances collected from Codeforces. Each instance corre-sponds to a full ICPC-style contest, comprising multiple prob-lems released simultaneously under a fixed time limit. 

4.3. Performance Metrics 

Following prior work [28, 29], we adopt pass rate as the primary evaluation metric. A generated program is considered correct only if it successfully passes all test cases in the evalu-ation suite. In particular, we focus on the Pass@1 metric [8], which evaluates whether a single generated solution is correct. This choice reflects practical usage scenarios in which only one final program is typically produced and submitted for evalua-tion. 

4.4. Baselines 

We employ three representative baseline methods to evalu-ate the performance of our proposed approach: 

• MapCoder. MapCoder [8] is a multi-agent framework designed to emulate the step-by-step reasoning process typically employed by human programmers. It decom-poses code generation into a sequence of coordinated rea-soning stages, in which specialized agents collaboratively analyze the problem, plan solution strategies, and gener-ate code. By explicitly modeling the human problem-solving workflow, MapCoder seeks to improve solution quality through structured reasoning rather than relying on one-shot generation. 

• CodeSim. CodeSim [9] is a multi-agent framework that employs a staged pipeline comprising planning, genera-tion, and refinement phases. Agents interact through an iterative loop in which high-level planning guides code generation, and subsequent refinement steps correct er-rors or enhance solution quality. This coordination mech-anism allows CodeSim to progressively refine candidate programs based on intermediate feedback. 

• CodeTree. CodeTree [20] formulates program genera-tion as a tree-structured search problem. Starting from an initial root node, it incrementally expands candidate so-lution nodes and evaluates them using execution-based feedback. Based on these evaluations, the framework dynamically prunes unpromising branches while further exploring promising ones, gradually converging toward high-quality solutions. 

4.5. Selection of LLMs 

We evaluate four representative LLMs, including DeepSeek-v3.2, GPT-4o, Qwen3-Coder-480B, and Gemini-2.5-flash-thinking, which collectively represent general-purpose, code-specialized, and reasoning-oriented models, thus reflecting the dominant de-ployment scenarios of current large language model systems. Specifically, DeepSeek-v3.2 and GPT-4o serve as representa-tive general-purpose LLMs, providing strong natural language understanding, instruction following, and broad reasoning ca-pabilities across diverse tasks. Qwen3-Coder-480B represents coder-oriented LLMs, emphasizing program synthesis, imple-mentation correctness, and engineering-focused behaviors, which are particularly relevant for competitive program generation. 

Gemini-2.5-flash-thinking is included as a reasoning-oriented model that explicitly prioritizes multi-step deliberation, allow-ing us to evaluate our method under a reasoning-centric gener-ation regime. 

4.6. Implementation Details and Running Platform 

Our framework is implemented by invoking multiple main-stream LLM APIs via the unified gateway provided by Yunwu API 2, which ensures consistent request formatting, authenti-cation, and logging across di ff erent providers, and facilitates seamless switching between model endpoints during experi-mentation. All experiments were conducted on a high-performance work-station equipped with an Intel Core i7-13600K CPU, 32 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of memory, running Windows 10. 

5. Result Analysis 

5.1. RQ1: Comparison with Baselines 

Approach. To evaluate the performance of our proposed competitive program generation framework, ARIADNE, we com-pare it against three state-of-the-art baselines, including Map-Coder [8], CodeSim [9], and CodeTree [20]. These baselines employ diverse multi-agent collaboration strategies, providing a comprehensive assessment of ARIADNE’s e ff ectiveness. We primarily adopt the Pass@1 metric [28, 29] to measure solution correctness. Additionally, we record runtime statistics (such as execution time, token consumption, and Monte Carlo search tree depth) to o ff er a more complete evaluation of performance and e ffi ciency. 

Result. Table 1 compares ARIADNE against three strong baselines (MapCoder, CodeSim, and CodeTree) under matched settings across four LLM backbones and four benchmarks (16 configurations in total). In every configuration, ARIADNE achieves the highest Pass@1, indicating that its gains are not tied to a specific model or dataset. Aggregated over all configurations, ARIADNE attains an average Pass@1 of 29.72%, substantially higher than the best baseline CodeSim (17.67%), corresponding to a 68.2% relative improvement. The advantage is particularly clear on APPS with GPT-4o, where ARIADNE reaches 41.3% (62 /150 solved), yielding relative improvements of 225.97% over MapCoder, 129.44% over CodeSim, and 169.41% over CodeTree, and similar dominance holds on CodeContests, Code-Contests +, and LiveCodeBench. From the perspective of LLM backbones, ARIADNE re-mains consistently e ff ective while absolute performance varies with the underlying model. Averaged over the four datasets, 

> 2https://yunwu.ai/

11 Table 1: Performance comparison of ARIADNE and state-of-the-art baselines, reported in Pass@1 (%). 

LLM Method Dataset (pass@1 %) APPS CodeContest CodeContest + LiveCodeBench DeepSeek-V3.2 ARIADNE 44.67 42.42 23.64 22.73 MapCoder 14.00 26.06 10.00 8.18 CodeSim 17.33 24.85 12.72 15.45 CodeTree 16.00 25.45 11.82 12.73 GPT-4o ARIADNE 41.30 46.67 27.27 20.91 MapCoder 12.67 20.61 8.18 12.73 CodeSim 18.00 26.06 14.55 11.82 CodeTree 15.33 23.03 10.91 11.82 Qwen3-Coder-480B ARIADNE 27.33 32.12 22.73 14.55 MapCoder 14.67 18.79 6.36 9.09 CodeSim 19.33 23.64 13.64 12.73 CodeTree 16.67 21.21 10.00 10.91 Gemini-2.5-Flash-Thinking ARIADNE 27.33 29.09 26.36 26.36 MapCoder 12.67 12.72 10.91 12.73 CodeSim 18.00 20.00 16.36 18.18 CodeTree 14.67 18.18 13.64 14.55 ARIADNE achieves 33.37% (DeepSeek-V3.2), 34.04% (GPT-4o), 24.18% (Qwen3-Coder-480B), and 27.29% (Gemini-2.5-Flash-Thinking), outperforming the strongest baseline under each backbone by 89.7%, 93.3%, 39.5%, and 50.5%, respectively. This pattern suggests that ARIADNE provides robust search-and-repair benefits that transfer across model families rather than exploiting idiosyncrasies of a single LLM. Finally, comparing across datasets reveals that ARIADNE’s improvements persist under di ff erent domains and evaluation protocols. Relative to the strongest baseline averaged across backbones, ARIADNE improves Pass@1 by 93.5% on APPS, 59.0% on CodeContests, 74.6% on CodeContests +, and 45.3% on LiveCodeBench. Notably, although CodeContests + and Live-CodeBench generally yield lower absolute Pass@1 for all meth-ods, ARIADNE maintains a clear lead, indicating better gener-alization and higher exploration e ffi ciency in more challenging or less familiar problem distributions. The observed superiority of ARIADNE can be attributed to several factors. First, the blackboard system promotes pre-cise problem formulation, reducing misinterpretation by agents. Second, it maintains contextual consistency across multi-agent interactions while persistently updating key evidence to guide code refinement. Third, unlike baselines with fixed collabo-ration workflows, ARIADNE dynamically invokes appropriate agents according to the evolving code state, enhancing flexibil-ity. Finally, the MCTS transforms code generation into an it-erative process, e ff ectively balancing exploration of alternative solutions with exploitation of high-value drafts. Answer to RQ1: ARIADNE consistently outperforms baselines in Pass@1 across all four benchmarks and multiple LLM backends. The highest overall performance is observed with DeepSeek-V3.2, achieving 44.67 on APPS and 42.42 on CodeContests. These results demonstrate that the integration of a blackboard-driven MCTS frame-work substantially enhances competitive program gen-eration, improving first-attempt correctness and overall solution reliability. 

5.2. RQ2: Comparison of di ff erent search strategies 

Approach. In RQ2, we investigate the impact of di ff erent search strategies on ARIADNE’s ability to identify optimal pro-gram solutions. We compare the MCTS planner with three stan-dard baselines: Breadth-First Search (BFS), Depth-First Search (DFS), and Greedy Heuristic Search 3. All strategies are eval-uated on identical problem instances, employ the same LLM backends and prompt templates, and share the same agent in-terfaces and execution environment. Each algorithm follows the same evaluation protocol and reward computation, di ff er-ing solely in the search policy guiding action selection and ex-pansion. We report pass@1 as the primary metric, alongside runtime and token consumption. To assess e ffi ciency under re-source constraints, we further report token-normalized pass@1 ,defined as pass@1 divided by total token usage. 

> 3Greedy heuristic search selects the locally best action at each step without backtracking; for comparability, it is modeled as a bounded single-path search analogous to a degenerate tree.

12 Table 2: Comparison of search strategies (MCTS, BFS, DFS, and Greedy) under the same blackboard-driven agent architecture, reported in Pass@1 (%). 

Search Strategy APPS CodeContests CodeContests + LiveCodeBench ARIADNE-MCTS 41.33 46.67 27.27 20.91 ARIADNE-BFS 37.33 41.21 23.64 17.27 ARIADNE-DFS 36.67 40.00 22.73 16.36 ARIADNE-Greedy 34.67 36.36 20.00 14.55 

Result. Table 2 compares pass@1 across di ff erent search strategies (MCTS, BFS, DFS, Greedy) under the same blackboard-driven agent architecture and identical inference budgets on four datasets (APPS, CodeContests, CodeContests +, LiveCodeBench). MCTS consistently outperforms all baselines, achieving pass@1 

scores of 41.33 (APPS), 46.67 (CodeContests), 27.27 (Code-Contests +), and 20.91 (LiveCodeBench). BFS and DFS show moderate performance (e.g., 37.33 and 36.67 on representative datasets), whereas Greedy performs worst (e.g., 14.55 on Live-CodeBench), highlighting the limitations of naïve or purely lo-cal search strategies. The superior performance of MCTS can be attributed to its principled balance between exploration and exploitation. Un-like Greedy, which risks early commitment to locally optimal paths, MCTS maintains diverse exploration across plausible so-lution trajectories. Compared with DFS, which may over-invest in a single branch, MCTS iteratively refines node-value esti-mates via backpropagation, enabling globally informed deci-sions. Compared with BFS, which spreads computation uni-formly and may dilute the search budget over low-value nodes, MCTS reallocates expansions toward empirically promising nodes, improving sample e ffi ciency. When combined with the black-board’s persistent intermediate artifacts and feedback signals, MCTS more e ff ectively consolidates information to guide search, resulting in consistently higher pass@1 across all datasets. Answer to RQ2: Using MCTS as the planner enhances ARIADNE’s search e ff ectiveness within the same blackboard-driven agent architecture by adaptively balancing exploration and exploitation. Unlike BFS or DFS, which either dif-fuse the search budget across many branches or over-commit to a single path, MCTS concentrates computa-tion on high-potential action sequences while preserv-ing diversity, mitigating premature convergence. 

5.3. RQ3: Influence of Key Hyperparameters 

Approach. We jointly tune three key MCTS hyperparam-eters: the maximum tree depth D, the UCB exploration coef-ficient C (Eq. 3), and the softmax temperature τ (Eq. 4) used for child-node sampling. To isolate the e ff ect of the search pol-icy, we fix the problem set, model backend, inference settings, prompt templates, tooling /sandbox, and the quick /deep evalua-tion protocol with a consistent budget across all runs. All ex-periments in this section are conducted on the CodeContests dataset (165 problems). As a reference, we compare against a 

default MCTS baseline θbase = (Dbase = 4, Cbase = 1, τ base =

0.6), which serves as the standard configuration throughout this study. The selected model for this analysis is DeepSeek-V3.2 ,identified in RQ1 as the top-performing LLM. Since MCTS hyperparameters a ff ect both e ff ectiveness and effi ciency, tuning ( D, C, τ ) naturally induces trade-o ff s between solution quality and computational cost. We therefore cast hy-perparameter selection as a multi-objective optimization prob-lem: for each configuration θ = (D, C, τ ), we seek to maximize success rate (Pass@1) while minimizing resource consumption in terms of tokens and wall-clock time. Rather than collaps-ing these metrics into a single scalar with arbitrary weights, we first identify configurations that are Pareto-e ffi cient with re-spect to accuracy and e ffi ciency, and then apply a deterministic tie-breaking rule that prioritizes Pass@1, followed by tokens-per-solved and time-per-solved. Due to computational constraints, we adopt a two-stage joint hyperparameter selection procedure. In Stage 1 (coarse screen-ing), we evaluate a sparse factorial grid over ( D, C, τ ), running each configuration with a limited number of random seeds. For each configuration θ = (D, C, τ ), we record pass@1 p (θ), total token usage T (θ), and wall-clock runtime W(θ), and compute effi ciency metrics as tokens-per-solved and time-per-solved :Tok /Solved( θ) = T (θ)

S (θ) , Time /Solved( θ) = W(θ)

S (θ) , (6) where S (θ) denotes the number of problems successfully solved under configuration θ 4.We retain a compact set of promising configurations by se-lecting Pareto-e ffi cient points with respect to higher pass@1 ,lower tokens-per-solved, and lower time-per-solved. Accord-ingly, we define the objective vector as 

m(θ) =  p(θ), −Tok /Solved( θ), −Time /Solved( θ). (7) We say that a configuration θi dominates θ j (denoted θi ≻ θ j) if it is no worse in all objectives and strictly better in at least one, i.e., 

∀k, mk(θi) ≥ mk(θ j) ∧ ∃k, mk(θi) > mk(θ j). (8) Given a set of evaluated configurations Θ, the Pareto frontier is defined as the subset of configurations that are not dominated by any other in Θ:

F (Θ) = {θ ∈ Θ | ∄θ′ ∈ Θ : θ′ ≻ θ}. (9)       

> 4If S(θ)=0, we treat e ffi ciency as ∞for comparison purposes.

13 Table 3: Stage-1 coarse screening results on CodeContests, summarizing performance across di ff erent MCTS depth ( D), exploration coe ffi cient ( C), and temperature (τ) configurations. 

D C τ pass@1 (%) ↑ T ok /S olved (θ) ↓ T ime /S olved (θ) ↓

4 0.5 0.4 35.15 125 5.6 4 1.0 0.6 40.00 118 5.2 4 1.5 0.8 40.61 115 5.1 5 0.5 0.4 36.36 122 5.5 5 1.0 0.6 41.21 112 4.9 5 1.5 0.8 41.82 110 4.8 6 0.5 0.4 35.76 135 6.2 6 1.0 0.6 39.39 125 5.8 6 1.5 0.8 40.00 122 5.6 In Stage 1, we identify the Pareto-e ffi cient set F (Θ1) and select the Top-K configurations for further refinement. Stage 2 (local refinement) constructs a denser joint grid around each selected candidate, varying D by ±1 and fine-tuning C and τ

within a bounded local range. The resulting configurations are merged, deduplicated, and re-evaluated with additional seeds to improve stability. From the Stage-2 Pareto frontier F (Θ2), the final hyperparameter setting ( D∗, C∗, τ ∗) is chosen by prioritiz-ing the highest pass@1 , with ties broken by minimizing tokens-per-solved and then time-per-solved. This two-stage procedure yields a principled, compute-aware selection of depth and exploration– exploitation hyperparameters. 

Result. Table 3 summarizes the Stage-1 coarse screen-ing results on CodeContests (165 problems; averaged over two seeds). Increasing the search depth from D=4 to D=5 consis-tently improves e ff ectiveness under comparable budgets, whereas overly deep trees ( D=6) incur higher cost without proportional gains. The best coarse-grid configuration is ( D=5, , C=1.5, , τ =0.8), achieving a pass@1 of 41.82%, compared with 40.00% for the default baseline (4,1.0,0.6). Effi ciency metrics also improve: tokens-per-solved decreases from 118 to 110, and time-per-solved from 5.2 to 4.8, indicating that moderate depth combined with slightly stronger exploration benefits both accuracy and resource utilization. Table 4 shows the Stage-2 local refinement outcomes. Af-ter refining the neighborhood of the Stage-1 Pareto candidates and re-evaluating with additional seeds, the recommended hy-perparameter setting is ( D=5, C=1.4, τ=0.7), yielding a pass@1 

of 42.42% (70 /165). This represents a +2.42 point improve-ment over the default baseline (40.00%) while also lowering ef-ficiency cost (tokens-per-solved: 118 → 111; time-per-solved: 5.2 → 4.9). An optional e ffi ciency-focused Pareto point (5, 1.2, 0.6) achieves 41.82% with the lowest cost (104 tokens-per-solved; 4.6 time-per-solved), illustrating the expected trade-o ff 

between e ff ectiveness and e ffi ciency. Following our selection rule, which prioritizes maximal pass@1 and breaks ties first by 

T ok /S olved and then by T ime /S olved , we adopt ( D, C, τ ) as the final hyperparameter setting. Answer to RQ3: MCTS depth and exploration–exploitation hyperparam-eter jointly govern the trade-o ff between e ff ectiveness and e ffi ciency. Our results show that increasing depth from shallow to moderate levels improves pass@1 and lowers cost per solved problem, while further increases yield diminishing returns accompanied by higher run-time and token usage. Likewise, moderate exploration, controlled by C and τ, achieves the best overall per-formance; insu ffi cient exploration leads to stagnation, whereas excessive exploration raises costs without con-sistent gains in accuracy. 

5.4. RQ4: E ff ectiveness Under Realistic Competitive Contests 

Approach. To evaluate RQ4 under realistic competitive programming contests, we use two recent regional contests from Codeforces as real-world benchmarks, treating each full con-test as a single evaluation instance: (i) the 2025 ICPC Asia Shenyang Regional Contest 5, and (ii) the 2025 National Invita-tional of CCPC Fujian, the 12th Fujian Collegiate Programming Contest 6. For each problem in a contest, ARIADNE generates up to k candidate solutions under a fixed computational budget. We report pass@1 , pass@3 , and pass@5 as the primary met-rics, where pass@k indicates whether at least one of the first k

solutions passes all o ffi cial test cases. We adopt two complementary evaluation protocols to as-sess ARIADNE under matched contest conditions. First, we select the best-performing baseline from RQ1 and evaluate it on the same contests using identical problem sets, contest du-ration, computational budget, and execution /evaluation harness as used for ARIADNE. Contest-level outcomes, including the number of solved problems and pass@k (pass@1, pass@3, and pass@5), are compared directly to ensure that observed di ff er-ences reflect methodological advantages rather than evaluation discrepancies. Second, we evaluate ARIADNE using an ICPC-style medal scoring scheme. Specifically, within the fixed con-test duration, solving at least Xgold problems corresponds to a 

> 5https://codeforces.com/gym/106252
> 6https://codeforces.com/gym/105977

14 Table 4: Recommended MCTS configuration ( D, C , τ ∗) and comparative results on CodeContests (165 problems). 

Setting D C τ pass@1 (%) ↑ T ok /S olved (θ) ↓ T ime /S olved (θ) ↓

Default (baseline) θbase 4 1.0 0.6 40.00 118 5.2 Stage-2 recommended ( D∗, C∗, τ ∗) 5 1.4 0.7 42.42 111 4.9 Effi ciency-first Pareto point (optional) 5 1.2 0.6 41.82 104 4.6 gold medal, solving at least Xsilver corresponds to a silver medal, and solving at least Xbronze corresponds to a bronze medal, with remaining cases categorized accordingly. For each pass@k set-ting, we aggregate the number of solved problems per con-test and report the highest medal tier achieved by ARIADNE. Medal assignments follow contest-specific award information from the XCPCIO scoreboard platform 7, which provides team rankings and corresponding medal tiers. 

Result. Table 5 presents the contest-level outcomes on the two real-world benchmarks. Under strictly matched conditions, ARIADNE consistently outperforms the strongest baseline iden-tified in RQ1. On the 2025 ICPC Asia Shenyang Regional con-test, ARIADNE achieves higher pass@1 /3/5 scores (3 /13, 6 /13, 7/13 vs. 1 /13, 4 /13, 5 /13) and solves more problems across each 

k setting (Solved@1 /3/5: 3 /6/7 vs. 1 /4/5). A similar pattern holds for the 2025 CCPC (Fujian) Invitational, where ARI-ADNE attains superior pass@1 /3/5 (4 /13, 5 /13, 7 /13 vs. 2 /13, 2/13, 5 /13) and higher solved counts (4 /5/7 vs. 2 /2/5). These consistent improvements indicate that ARIADNE’s combina-tion of blackboard-driven evidence reuse and MCTS-based global planning enhances its ability to solve contest problems com-pared with the best baseline configuration under the same real-istic conditions. In addition to pass@k and solved counts, we interpret per-formance through an ICPC-style medal-based scoring frame-work aligned with the XCPCIO scoreboard. Under this human-facing metric, ARIADNE achieves at least a bronze tier on the evaluated contests (Medal@1 /3/5: – /Bronze /Silver for Shenyang; –/Bronze /Silver for Fujian), demonstrating that its end-to-end contest performance is comparable to lower-tier human teams. Overall, these results show that ARIADNE not only surpasses the strongest baseline in direct head-to-head comparisons but also attains practically meaningful performance in full contest-style evaluations. Answer to RQ4: On two recent regional contests, ARIADNE con-sistently outperforms the strongest baseline in both 

pass@k and solved-problem counts, achieving higher XCPCIO medal tiers as k increases. This demonstrates that ARIADNE’s blackboard-driven evidence accumu-lation, combined with MCTS-based global planning, enables more e ff ective end-to-end contest performance under realistic conditions. 

> 7https://board.xcpcio.com/

6. Discussions 

6.1. Token Assumption Analysis 6.1.1. Agent-level Token Consumption Statistics 

Motivation. We include a per-agent token breakdown to understand where computation is spent in a multi-agent search system and whether the observed gains are driven by evidence-producing components such as testing and repair rather than re-peated generic generation. This analysis also reveals potential ine ffi ciencies, for example, agents that consume substantial to-kens without proportionate improvements, which helps identify opportunities for future optimization. 

Approach. To quantify agent-level token consumption statis-tics across datasets, we run ARIADNE on all four datasets and log token usage for every LLM call, tagging each call with the agent that triggered it. For each dataset, we aggregate prompt and completion tokens per agent over all problem instances, all iterations, and all search branches, and then compute the av-erage per-problem usage for each agent, reported as Average Prompt Tokens and Average Completion Tokens. We further report each agent’s share of the average per-problem token bud-get by normalizing these averages against the dataset-level per-problem totals. Throughout, we apply a consistent token ac-counting protocol across agents and phases, so the breakdown reflects true compute allocation rather than di ff erences in mea-surement. 

Result. As shown in Figure 5, prompt-token usage is dom-inated by the Scoring Agent and the Code Repair Agent across all datasets. On APPS, the Scoring Agent and Code Repair Agent consume 2,273 and 4,546 prompt tokens per problem, respectively, while Test Generation and Strategy Analysis re-main much smaller at 700 and 1,000, and Code Generation is 1,100. The same pattern holds on harder benchmarks. On LiveCodeBench, Scoring and Code Repair increase to 5,099 and 10,198 prompt tokens per problem, compared with 1,300 for Test Generation, 1,900 for Strategy Analysis, and 2,002 for Code Generation. This is expected because these two agents are triggered more frequently during search. In particular, scoring is invoked whenever a new draft is produced to obtain execution feedback, and repair becomes the key driver as drafts approach correctness. Moreover, both agents must repeatedly carry the full program text in their inputs, so their prompt tokens grow substantially with the number of invocations and the amount of contextual evidence attached. For completion tokens, the largest consumers are the Code Generation Agent and the Code Repair Agent, reflecting that both must emit full code artifacts rather than short structured outputs. On APPS, Code Repair and Code Generation aver-age 3,840 and 1,100 completion tokens per problem, exceeding 15 Table 5: Results on real-world competitive programming contests, comparing ARIADNE with the strongest RQ1 baseline under identical contest settings. Reported metrics include pass@k , number of solved problems, and medal tiers based on the XCPCIO scoreboard.                                                                

> Contest Method pass@k ↑Solved ↑Medal Tier (XCPCIO) pass@1 pass@3 pass@5 @1 @3 @5 @1 @3 @5 2025 ICPC Asia Shenyang Regional ARIADNE 3/13 6/13 7/13 367–Bronze Silver CodeSim 1/13 4/13 5/13 145––Bronze 2025 CCPC (Fujian) Invitational ARIADNE 4/13 5/13 7/13 457–Bronze Silver CodeSim 2/13 2/13 5/13 225––Bronze
> Overall ARIADNE 7/26 11 /26 14 /26 711 14 CodeSim 3/26 6/26 10 /26 3610

Scoring, Test Generation, and Strategy Analysis at 703, 703, and 1,137. A similar trend appears on CodeContests, where Code Repair and Code Generation reach 6,961 and 2,000 com-pletion tokens per problem, while the remaining agents stay in the 1,295 to 2,046 range. On the harder datasets, Code Repair remains the top consumer, reaching 8,099 on CodeContests +

and 8,432 on LiveCodeBench, with Code Generation at 2,300 and 2,400. This pattern follows directly from agent roles. Code Generation is responsible for producing code drafts, while Code Repair handles later-stage iterative patching of the draft code and is typically called more times than Code Generation as the search focuses on fixing concrete failures, leading to the highest completion-token usage overall. At the dataset level, harder benchmarks require more to-kens per problem. CodeContests + and LiveCodeBench show higher average prompt and completion usage than APPS and CodeContests, which is consistent with increased di ffi culty and stricter evaluation demanding more extensive exploration and more iterations of testing and repair before converging to a passing solution. 

6.1.2. Budget Fairness and Comparability 

Motivation. Because token budget is a primary confounder in agentic and search-based code generation, improvements in pass rates can be misleading if they are achieved by simply spending more tokens. Our goal is to demonstrate that ARI-ADNE’s gains come from better decision making and more ef-fective allocation of compute across strategy, testing, and repair, rather than a brute-force increase in total token usage. There-fore, we explicitly analyze budget fairness and report cost-normalized metrics to verify that accuracy improvements persist when ac-counting for resource consumption. 

Approach. To evaluate cost-aware comparability, we fo-cus on the strongest baseline identified in our benchmark com-parison, CodeSim, and compare it against ARIADNE under matched settings, including the same model backend, inference configuration, prompts, tooling, and sandbox environment, and evaluation protocol. Beyond reporting pass rates, we compute effi ciency metrics that normalize performance by resource us-age, primarily tokens-per-solved, defined as total token con-sumption divided by the number of solved problems. This cost-normalized view allows us to assess whether ARIADNE de-livers higher accuracy at comparable or lower token cost per successful solution, rather than benefiting from increased token expenditure. 

Result. As shown in Table 6, ARIADNE consistently achieves higher Pass@1 than CodeSim across all four datasets under GPT-4o, but with slightly higher cost per successful solve. On APPS, ARIADNE solves 62 /150 problems with 41.30% Pass@1, compared to 27 /150 and 18.00% for CodeSim, while its To-kens /Solved is 49,163 versus 44,398. A similar pattern holds on CodeContests, where ARIADNE reaches 77 /165 solved and 46.67% Pass@1, outperforming CodeSim at 43 /165 and 26.06%, with Tokens /Solved of 65,095 versus 61,625. On the more chal-lenging CodeContests + and LiveCodeBench benchmarks, ARI-ADNE preserves a clear accuracy advantage, solving 30 /110 versus 16 /110 and 23 /110 versus 13 /110, but Tokens /Solved re-mains modestly higher at 144,855 versus 127,700 and 180,729 versus 158,214, respectively. This tradeo ff is expected given ARIADNE’s design. Com-pared with CodeSim, ARIADNE allocates additional computa-tion to evidence-driven exploration, including repeated testing, counterexample analysis, and repair iterations, which increases total token usage but improves the probability of escaping early incorrect drafts and converging to a correct solution. Because these diagnostics and repair steps are invoked more frequently on harder datasets, the total tokens per success rises substan-tially on CodeContests + and LiveCodeBench for both methods, and the gap in Tokens /Solved reflects that ARIADNE spends extra budget to sustain higher solve rates under stricter evalua-tion. 

6.2. Threats to Validity 6.2.1. Internal Validity 

Compute budget and resource allocation. Subtle mismatches in compute budgeting (e.g., per-step token limits, number of ex-pansions, maximum depth, and budget allocation across analy-sis /generation /testing /repair) can shift the exploration–exploitation balance in search-based systems, making observed gains par-tially attributable to budgeting choices rather than algorithmic advantages. To alleviate this threat, we fix the model backend, inference settings, prompt templates, tooling /sandbox environ-ment, and the quick /deep evaluation pipeline, and enforce a consistent overall budget across all methods to maximize com-parability. We additionally report runtime statistics to contex-16 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000 

Tokens 

> APPS
> CodeContests
> CodeContests+
> LiveCodeBench
> 23.6%
> 2,273
> 7.3%
> 700
> 10.4%
> 1,000
> 47.3%
> 4,546
> 11.4%
> 1,100
> 24.6%
> 3,927
> 6.9%
> 1,100
> 9.4%
> 1,500
> 49.1%
> 7,854
> 10.0%
> 1,600
> 24.9%
> 4,600
> 6.5%
> 1,200
> 9.2%
> 1,699
> 49.7%
> 9,200
> 9.7%
> 1,800
> 24.9%
> 5,099
> 6.3%
> 1,300
> 9.3%
> 1,900
> 49.7%
> 10,198
> 9.8%
> 2,002
> Scoring Agent
> Test Generation Agent
> Strategy Analysis Agent
> Code Repair Agent
> Code Generation Agent

(a) Average Prompt Tokens (per–problem). 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 

Tokens 

> APPS
> CodeContests
> CodeContests+
> LiveCodeBench
> 9.4%
> 703
> 9.4%
> 703
> 15.2%
> 1,137
> 51.3%
> 3,840
> 14.7%
> 1,100
> 9.5%
> 1,295
> 9.8%
> 1,336
> 15.0%
> 2,046
> 51.0%
> 6,961
> 14.7%
> 2,000
> 9.0%
> 1,440
> 11.2%
> 1,792
> 14.8%
> 2,368
> 50.6%
> 8,099
> 14.4%
> 2,300
> 13.5%
> 2,362
> 8.4%
> 1,470
> 16.2%
> 2,835
> 48.2%
> 8,432
> 13.7%
> 2,400
> Scoring Agent
> Test Generation Agent
> Strategy Analysis Agent
> Code Repair Agent
> Code Generation Agent

(b) Average Completion tokens (per–problem). Figure 5: Agent-level token consumption across datasets. 

tualize accuracy improvements with their computational over-head. 

Faithfulness of semantic translation into the blackboard rep-resentation. Translating problem statements into a structured blackboard may omit key details or resolve ambiguities incor-rectly, which can systematically bias downstream decisions (e.g., test synthesis and repair). If the blackboard is mutable dur-ing search, later operations may introduce silent drift and am-plify early interpretation errors across branches. To alleviate this threat, we adopt a fixed and standardized extraction schema with consistent prompting for blackboard construction, and we treat the problem-model components on the blackboard as im-mutable state so that subsequent operations cannot modify them, preventing silent drift throughout the search. 

Evaluation pipeline e ff ects. Performance is sensitive to the exact evaluation protocol (sandbox execution, timeouts, test or-dering, early stopping, and fast screening). Small implementa-tion di ff erences can flip borderline outcomes and, because eval-uation feedback guides search, can alter value propagation and expansion priorities. To alleviate this threat, we run all methods under the same sandbox and an identical evaluation protocol, fix random seeds where applicable, and keep timeout and stopping rules consistent across all configurations. As future work, we plan to expand evaluations to additional platforms and contest settings to further stress-test robustness. 

Data leakage and contamination. LLMs may have been ex-posed during pretraining or subsequent data collection to bench-marks, near-duplicates, or related solutions, so apparent gains can partially reflect data leakage or memorization rather than true generalization. To alleviate this threat, we validate across multiple benchmarks and include LiveCodeBench, which is con-tinuously updated and incorporates contamination auditing, thereby reducing the likelihood that reported gains are explained by leakage. 

6.2.2. External Validity 

Representativeness of tasks and platforms. Contest-style bench-marks emphasize algorithm selection and edge-case handling, which di ff er from real-world software engineering in require-ments, maintainability, dependencies, and long-term evolution; thus, findings may not directly transfer to broader engineering code generation scenarios. To alleviate this threat, we evaluate on multiple benchmarks spanning di ff erent domains and pro-tocols and further include full contest instances to better ap-proximate real competitive settings. We also scope our claims explicitly to contest-style program generation to avoid over-17 Table 6: Cost-aware comparison between ARIADNE and CodeSim under GPT-4o. Solved counts are reported as solved /total. Tokens /Solved is computed as Total Tokens divided by Solved and then floored to an integer.                                           

> Dataset Method Solved Pass@1 (%) Total Tokens Tokens /Solved APPS (150) ARIADNE 62 /150 41.30 3,048,127 49,163 CodeSim 27 /150 18.00 1,198,765 44,398 CodeContests (165) ARIADNE 77 /165 46.67 5,012,345 65,095 CodeSim 43 /165 26.06 2,649,876 61,625 CodeContests +(110) ARIADNE 30 /110 27.27 4,345,678 144,855 CodeSim 16 /110 14.55 2,043,210 127,700 LiveCodeBench (110) ARIADNE 23 /110 20.91 4,156,789 180,729 CodeSim 13 /110 11.82 2,056,789 158,214

generalization. 

Limitations of contest-level evaluation. Offl ine contest prox-ies (such as pass@k and solved-to-medal mappings) cannot fully capture human competition dynamics. To alleviate this threat, we report both per-problem metrics (pass@1 /pass@k) and contest-level aggregates under fixed submission budgets, and interpret medal tiers as a proxy for o ffl ine problem-solving capacity un-der compute constraints rather than a full simulation of end-to-end human contest behavior. As future work, we will extend contest-level evaluations to additional platforms and contests. 

7. Related Work 

Competitive program generation aims to synthesize correct and e ffi cient solutions for algorithmic problems drawn from programming contests. Unlike general-purpose code genera-tion, it requires explicit algorithm selection, multi-step reason-ing, strict time–space constraints, and robust edge-case han-dling. Accordingly, recent benchmarks focus on algorithmic di-versity and execution-level correctness. ProBench [21] collects real contest problems with algorithm tags and di ffi culty annota-tions, while TACO [22] provides large-scale problems labeled with fine-grained topics and skills. CodeContests + [18] im-proves evaluation fidelity via higher-quality test construction, and COMPASS [23] broadens evaluation with multi-dimensional metrics covering correctness, e ffi ciency, and code quality. A growing line of work studies how to improve LLM per-formance in this setting beyond one-shot prompting, including agentic decomposition, self-refinement, and search-based gen-eration. Representative systems such as MapCoder [8], CodeSim [9], CodeCoR [10], and CodeTree [20] leverage iterative planning, retrieval /analysis signals, and structured exploration to navi-gate the large space of candidate algorithms and implementa-tions. Nevertheless, empirical studies consistently report that even strong LLMs remain brittle on competitive programming benchmarks, with success limited under basic prompting and substantial room for improvement even with agentic sca ff old-ing [25, 1]. A key reason is that contest problems rarely admit a single obvious generation path: multiple algorithmic strate-gies may be plausible, failure modes recur across problems, and e ff ective solving often requires coordinating distinct skills such as strategy selection, targeted test synthesis, and evidence-driven repair. Despite progress, prior approaches exhibit two recurring limitations. First, exploration is often implicitly anchored to a dominant draft or a single reasoning thread, which biases search toward local variations and makes it hard to coordinate het-erogeneous capabilities at the right time (e.g., switching from strategy analysis to counterexample-driven repair). Second, in-termediate artifacts (constraints extracted from statements, dis-covered invariants, counterexamples, and patch rationales) are frequently not represented as persistent, reusable state; conse-quently, knowledge gained along one branch is weakly trans-ferred to others, reducing sample-e ffi ciency in large program spaces where similar mistakes reappear. We propose ARIADNE, a reward-informed, blackboard-driven search framework for competitive program generation. Our key novelty is to treat solving as stateful exploration over a shared, structured blackboard that externalizes and persists problem un-derstanding and debugging evidence (e.g., constraints, corner cases, counterexamples, and repair hypotheses), while using an adaptive MCTS-style controller to explicitly plan and al-locate computation across competing actions. This design di-rectly mitigates the limitations above: (1) the controller enables principled exploration of alternative algorithmic strategies in-stead of over-committing to a single draft, and (2) the persistent blackboard promotes cross-branch knowledge transfer so that failures and fixes discovered in one branch can guide subse-quent expansions, improving exploration e ffi ciency and reduc-ing repeated errors. Empirically, ARIADNE consistently out-performs strong agentic and search-based baselines across mul-tiple competitive programming benchmarks and LLM backbones, and the gains translate to stronger end-to-end outcomes on full contest instances, including improved pass@k behavior and higher contest-level performance under increasing submission budgets. 

8. Conclusion and Future Work 

We presented ARIADNE, an agentic, blackboard-driven MCTS framework for competitive program generation. Our key nov-elty is to cast solving as stateful global search over hetero-geneous actions. MCTS explicitly plans and allocates com-pute across alternative strategy, testing, and repair decisions, 18 while a shared blackboard persists structured evidence such as constraints, counterexamples, and repair cues for reuse across branches and iterations. This design addresses two common limitations of prior approaches. It avoids over-committing to a single dominant draft, where an early solution attempt anchors subsequent exploration and the search spends most of its budget on local edits around the same algorithmic hypothesis. It also avoids treating intermediate artifacts as disposable by transfer-ring diagnostic knowledge across iterations. Empirically, under matched settings, ARIADNE consistently outperforms strong agentic and search-based baselines across benchmarks, and the gains translate to stronger end-to-end contest outcomes, with improved pass rates and higher contest-level performance that becomes more pronounced as the submission budget increases. In the future, we first want to make the blackboard repre-sentation more faithful and robust, including better ambiguity handling in problem statements and mechanisms to revise ear-lier interpretations when new evidence contradicts them. We second want to strengthen the planning and learning signals used by search, such as explicit e ffi ciency modeling and multi-objective rewards that capture solution quality beyond correct-ness. Finally, we want to incorporate learning-guided priors that adapt branching and budget allocation based on the esti-mated value of information, improving both sample-e ffi ciency and robustness for long-horizon program generation. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement Minnan Wei: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Data Curation, Writing-Original Draft. Xiang Chen: 

Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing -review & editing, Supervision. Xiaoshuai Niu: Data curation, Software, Vali-dation. Siyu Chen: Data curation, Software, Validation. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing fi-nancial interests or personal relationships that could have ap-peared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 

Acknowledgments 

Minnan Wei and Xiang Chen have contributed equally to this work and are co-first authors. Xiang Chen is the corre-sponding author. This research was partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61202006), and the Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. SJCX25_2003). 

References 

[1] M. S. Hossain, A. Tabassum, M. F. Arefin, T. S. Za-man, Llm-pros: Analyzing large language models’ per-formance in competitive problem solving, in: 2025 IEEE /ACM International Workshop on Large Language Models for Code (LLM4Code), IEEE, 2025, pp. 80–87. [2] S. Ouyang, J. M. Zhang, M. Harman, M. Wang, An em-pirical study of the non-determinism of chatgpt in code generation, ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34 (2) (2025) 1–28. [3] Z. Wang, Z. Zhou, D. Song, Y. Huang, S. Chen, L. Ma, T. Zhang, Where do large language models fail when gen-erating code?, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08731 (2024). [4] A. M. Esfahani, N. Kahani, S. A. Ajila, Understanding defects in generated codes by language models, in: 2024 34th International Conference on Collaborative Advances in Software and COmputiNg (CASCON), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–10. [5] A. A. Abbassi, L. Da Silva, A. Nikanjam, F. Khomh, Unveiling ine ffi ciencies in llm-generated code: To-ward a comprehensive taxonomy, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06327 (2025). [6] T. Dinh, J. Zhao, S. Tan, R. Negrinho, L. Lausen, S. Zha, G. Karypis, Large language models of code fail at com-pleting code with potential bugs, Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems 36 (2023) 41386–41412. [7] F. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Shi, H. Huang, R. Wang, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Exploring and evaluating hallucinations in llm-powered code generation, CoRR (2024). [8] M. A. Islam, M. E. Ali, M. R. Parvez, Mapcoder: Multi-agent code generation for competitive problem solving, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11403 (2024). [9] M. A. Islam, M. E. Ali, M. R. Parvez, Codesim: Multi-agent code generation and problem solving through simulation-driven planning and debugging, in: Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, 2025, pp. 5113–5139. [10] R. Pan, H. Zhang, C. Liu, Codecor: An llm-based self-reflective multi-agent framework for code generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.07811 (2025). [11] B. Xu, Y. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Gao, Sra-mcts: Self-driven reason-ing augmentation with monte carlo tree search for code generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11053 (2024). [12] Z. Chen, Z. Meng, W. Zhao, W. Wang, H. Zhao, J. Zhan, J. Cui, H. Zhong, Treemind: Automatically reproducing android bug reports via llm-empowered monte carlo tree search, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.22431 (2025). 19 [13] M. DeLorenzo, A. B. Chowdhury, V. Gohil, S. Thakur, R. Karri, S. Garg, J. Rajendran, Make every move count: Llm-based high-quality rtl code generation using mcts, arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03289 (2024). [14] B. Han, S. Zhang, Exploring advanced llm multi-agent systems based on blackboard architecture, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01701 (2025). [15] A. Salemi, M. Parmar, P. Goyal, Y. Song, J. Yoon, H. Za-mani, H. Palangi, T. Pfister, Llm-based multi-agent black-board system for information discovery in data science, arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01285 (2025). [16] D. Hendrycks, S. Basart, S. Kadavath, M. Mazeika, A. Arora, E. Guo, C. Burns, S. Puranik, H. He, D. Song, et al., Measuring coding challenge competence with apps, arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09938 (2021). [17] Y. Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, J. Schrit-twieser, R. Leblond, T. Eccles, J. Keeling, F. Gimeno, A. Dal Lago, et al., Competition-level code generation with alphacode, Science 378 (6624) (2022) 1092–1097. [18] Z. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Sun, H. Li, K. Shen, Codecon-tests +: High-quality test case generation for competitive programming, arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05817 (2025). [19] N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W.-D. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, I. Stoica, Live-codebench: Holistic and contamination free evalua-tion of large language models for code, arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974 (2024). [20] J. Li, H. Le, Y. Zhou, C. Xiong, S. Savarese, D. Sahoo, Codetree: Agent-guided tree search for code generation with large language models, in: Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2025, pp. 3711–3726. [21] L. Yang, R. Jin, L. Shi, J. Peng, Y. Chen, D. Xiong, Probench: Benchmarking large language models in com-petitive programming, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20868 (2025). [22] R. Li, J. Fu, B.-W. Zhang, T. Huang, Z. Sun, C. Lyu, G. Liu, Z. Jin, G. Li, Taco: Topics in algorithmic code generation dataset, CoRR (2023). [23] J. Meaden, M. Jarosz, P. Jodłowski, G. Melnik, Com-pass: A multi-dimensional benchmark for evaluating code generation in large language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13757 (2025). [24] T. Ito, M. R. Salleh, A blackboard-based negotiation for collaborative supply chain system, Journal of Materials Processing Technology 107 (1-3) (2000) 398–403. [25] M. Wei, Z. Li, X. Chen, M. Zheng, Z. Qu, C. Yu, S. Chen, X. Ju, Evaluating and improving llm-based competitive program generation, Information and Software Technol-ogy (2025) 107977. [26] K. Zhang, J. Li, G. Li, X. Shi, Z. Jin, Codeagent: Enhanc-ing code generation with tool-integrated agent systems for real-world repo-level coding challenges, in: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024, pp. 13643–13658. [27] D. Huang, J. M. Zhang, M. Luck, Q. Bu, Y. Qing, H. Cui, Agentcoder: Multi-agent-based code generation with iterative testing and optimisation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.13010 (2023). [28] D. Zan, B. Chen, D. Yang, Z. Lin, M. Kim, B. Guan, Y. Wang, W. Chen, J.-G. Lou, Cert: continual pre-training on sketches for library-oriented code generation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06888 (2022). [29] Q. Zheng, X. Xia, X. Zou, Y. Dong, S. Wang, Y. Xue, L. Shen, Z. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Li, et al., Codegeex: A pre-trained model for code generation with multilingual benchmarking on humaneval-x, in: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discov-ery and Data Mining, 2023, pp. 5673–5684. 

Minnan Wei is currently pursuing a Master’s degree at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Nan-tong University. His research interests include competitive pro-gram generation and vulnerability detection. 

Xiang Chen received the B.Sc. degree in the School of Man-agement from Xi’an Jiaotong University, China in 2002. Then he received his M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in computer software and theory from Nanjing University, China in 2008 and 2011 re-spectively. He is currently an Associate Professor at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Nantong Uni-versity. He has authored or co-authored more than 170 pa-pers in refereed journals or conferences, such as IEEE Transac-tions on Software Engineering, ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, IEEE Transactions on Reliabil-ity, Empirical Software Engineering, Information and Software Technology, Journal of Systems and Software, Software Test-ing, Verification and Reliability, Journal of Software: Evolu-tion and Process, Automated Software Engineering, Software -Practice and Experience, Science of Computer Programming, Computer & Security, Knowledge-based Systems, Engineer-ing Applications of Artificial Intelligence, International Con-ference on Software Engineering (ICSE), International Confer-ence on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE), Inter-national Conference Automated Software Engineering (ASE), International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (IS-STA), International Conference on Software Maintenance and 20 Evolution (ICSME), International Conference on Program Com-prehension (ICPC), International Symposium on Software Re-liability Engineering (ISSRE) and International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering (SANER). His research interests include software engineering, in particular software testing and maintenance, security vulnerability detec-tion and understanding, large language models for software en-gineering, software repository mining, and empirical software engineering. He received two ACM SIGSOFT distinguished paper awards in ICSE 2021 and ICPC 2023. He is an editorial board member of Information and Software Technology. More information can be found at: https://xchencs.github.io/ index.html .

Xiaoshuai Niu is currently pursuing his Bachelor degree at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Nan-tong University. His research interests include software reposi-tory mining. 

Siyu Chen is currently pursuing a Master’s degree at the School of Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, Nan-tong Uni-versity. Her research interests include software vulnerability analysis. 21 Appendix A. Prompt Templates 

Appendix A.1. Strategy Analysis Prompt 

You are a competitive programming strategist. Given the problem and observed evidence, propose algorithmic strategies. PROBLEM SUMMARY {problem_summary} CONSTRAINTS {constraints} EVIDENCE FROM EXECUTION - recent_statuses: {recent_statuses} - common_failure_patterns: {failure_patterns} - representative_counterexamples: {counterexamples} OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT JSON) Return a JSON object with key "strategies", value is a list of strategies. Each strategy must contain: - "id": short snake_case id - "name": short name - "applicability_conditions": list of strings - "complexity_upper_bound": string like "O(n log n)" - "risk_flags": list of strings - "minimal_evidence_set": list of strings - "notes": string - "bid": { "p": float in [0,1], "c": float in [0,1], "r": float in [0,1] } Also include "recommended_active_id": one of the ids. RULES - Provide 2 to 4 strategies. - If uncertain, include a baseline safe strategy. - Use constraints to justify complexity bounds. Return ONLY JSON. 

Appendix A.2. Code Generation Prompt 

You are an expert competitive programmer. TASK Write a correct and efficient Python 3 solution for the problem below. PROBLEM STATEMENT {problem_statement} INPUT/OUTPUT SPEC {io_spec} CONSTRAINTS {constraints} REQUIRED INVARIANTS / CORRECTNESS CONDITIONS {invariants} EDGE CASE CHECKLIST {edge_cases} KNOWN FAILING / TRICKY CASES (from blackboard) {counterexamples} RULES - Output MUST be ONLY valid Python code (no markdown, no explanation). - The solution MUST read from stdin and write to stdout. - Be robust to extra spaces/newlines. - Ensure time complexity fits constraints. - Prefer simple, standard-library-only code. - Add minimal comments only where needed for correctness. Return ONLY the final Python code. 

Appendix A.3. Test Generation Prompt 

You are a test engineer for competitive programming solutions. PROBLEM {problem_statement} INPUT/OUTPUT SPEC {io_spec} CONSTRAINTS {constraints} EDGE CASE CHECKLIST {edge_cases} KNOWN COUNTEREXAMPLES (inputs that broke solutions) {counterexamples} TASK Propose additional test cases that are likely to reveal bugs: - extreme values - boundary conditions - tricky formatting - small exhaustive cases if applicable OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT JSON) Return a JSON object with key "tests", value is a list. Each item: - "input": string (must end with newline) - "expected_output": optional string (if you can deduce it confidently; else null) - "origin": one of ["GENERATED_EXTREME","GENERATED_RANDOM", "GENERATED_ENUM","MINIMIZATION_HINT"] 

22 - "rationale": short string RULES - Provide 6 to 12 tests. - At least 3 must be extreme/boundary. - If expected_output is unknown, set it to null. Return ONLY JSON. 

Appendix A.4. Scoring Prompt 

SCORING_PROMPT_TEMPLATE = """You are a strict evaluator for competitive programming solutions. PROBLEM {problem_statement} INPUT/OUTPUT SPEC {io_spec} CONSTRAINTS {constraints} CANDIDATE CODE {current_code} KNOWN COUNTEREXAMPLES {counterexamples} TESTS (STRICT JSON) {tests_json} EXECUTION RESULTS (STRICT JSON) {exec_results_json} TASK Summarize the evaluation outcome and extract reusable diagnostics. OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT JSON) Return a JSON object with: - "status": one of ["PASS","FAIL","RUNTIME_ERROR", "TIMEOUT","MEMORY_ERROR"] - "error_type": one of ["WA","TLE","RE","MLE","FORMAT","UNKNOWN"] - "reward": float in [0,1] - "failing_tests": list (up to 6 items), each item includes: "input", "expected_output", "actual_output", "origin", "diff_summary" - "patch_cues": list of short repair cues grounded in the failures (up to 6) RULES - If all tests pass, set status="PASS", error_type="UNKNOWN", reward=1.0, and failing_tests=[]. - If any test fails, set status="FAIL" unless execution indicates RE/TLE/MLE/FORMAT. - Keep outputs concise and strictly follow the JSON schema. Return ONLY JSON. """ 

Appendix A.5. Code Repair Prompt 

You are a senior engineer fixing a competitive programming solution. PROBLEM (for reference) {problem_statement} CURRENT CODE {current_code} FAILURE DIAGNOSTICS - status: {status} - error_type: {error_type} - failing_tests: {failing_tests} PATCH PROPOSALS (apply the best subset, respect constraints) {patch_proposals} RULES - Return ONLY valid Python code (no markdown, no explanation). - Preserve working parts; change minimal lines necessary. - Ensure the fix addresses the failing tests. - Do NOT introduce new I/O format changes. - Keep complexity within constraints. - If multiple patches conflict, choose the safer one. Return ONLY the repaired Python code. 

23