Title: LARA: Validation-Driven Agentic Supercomputer Workflows for Atomistic Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.22571v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Apr 2026 00:58:22 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
## LARA-HPC: Validation-Driven Agentic Supercomputer Workflows for Atomistic Modeling 

William Dawson, 1 Louis Beal, 2 Yoann Curé, 3 Giuseppe Fisicaro, 4 Dorian Rolland, 3 and Luigi Genovese 3

> 1

RIKEN Center for Computational Science, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan 

> 2

INRIA, France 

> 3

University Grenoble Alpes, MEM, L_Sim, F-38000 Grenoble, France 

> 4

Istituto per la Microelettronica e Microsistemi, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Z.I. VIII Strada 5, I-95121 Catania, Italy 

Large language models (LLMs) and agentic systems have recently demonstrated potential for automating scientific workflows, including atomistic simulations. However, their deployment in high-performance computing (HPC) environments remains limited by the lack of mechanisms en-suring correctness, reproducibility, and safe interaction with computational resources. Generated workflows suffer from inconsistencies, incorrect API usage, or invalid physical configurations — lead-ing to failed or unreliable simulations. In this work, we introduce LARA-HPC , a validation-driven agentic framework to enable reliable workflow generation for atomistic modeling on HPC systems. Our approach is based on three key components: (i) a controlled execution layer that mediates all interactions with HPC resources; (ii) simulation-native validation through dry-run capabilities, enabling execution-level verification without incurring resource cost; and (iii) a multi-phase agentic pipeline combining retrieval-augmented generation and iterative refinement. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach performing an end-to-end atomistic simulation workflow on HPC by applying LARA-HPC to Density Functional Theory simulations. The results show that validation-driven generation significantly improves robustness and enables iterative correction of both syntactic and physical inconsistencies. More broadly, this work advocates for a shift from generation-first to validation-first paradigms in Artificial Intelligence (AI) assisted scientific computing. We argue that the future task of the computational physics community is to develop domain specific agentic systems based on structured tooling to realize an HPC enabled co-piloted research ecosystem. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have significantly expanded the capabilities of automated code generation, enabling the construction of increasingly complex workflows from natural language descriptions. These models have demonstrated strong capabilities in reasoning over structured tasks, leading to the develop-ment of Artificial Intelligence (AI) copilots for software engineering [1, 2]. In scientific domains such as compu-tational chemistry and materials science, these develop-ments open new opportunities for automating simulation pipelines and accelerating research workflows [3–5]. In particular, LLM-based copilots and agentic systems (Fig. 1) have demonstrated promising results in assisting scientific tasks, including experimental automation and atomistic simulations [6–12]. Several frameworks have been proposed to automate molecular dynamics work-flows or computational chemistry pipelines [4, 13, 14]. Agentic systems like DREAMS (DFT-based Research Engine for Agentic Materials Screening) aims at au-tomating high-fidelity density functional theory (DFT) simulations through coordinated LLM agents, enabling autonomous, expert-level materials discovery and sys-tematic error handling [15]. Despite these advances, the deployment of such systems in high-performance com-puting (HPC) environments remains challenging. Scien-tific software stacks are often developed within special-ized communities, evolve rapidly, and lack stable or fully documented interfaces. Scientific simulations in HPC environments involve multiple stages, including input preparation, job sub-mission, execution, and post-processing. While work-flow management systems have been developed to au-tomate these processes and ensure reproducibility [16, 17], integrating AI-driven systems into these environ-ments introduces additional challenges, such as the need for controlled access to resources and compatibil-ity with scheduling systems. LLM-generated workflows frequently suffer from inconsistencies, incorrect applica-tion programming interface (API) usage, or incomplete configurations. In HPC contexts, these issues are criti-cal as erroneous inputs lead to wasted computational re-sources, failed jobs, or scientifically invalid results. It is not sufficient to use a system with merely a high success rate (e.g., 95%), as erroneous runs can have substantial consequences. HPC systems also often have high latency for job execution; hence, agentic systems cannot achieve productivity using a trial-and-error driven strategy, even if that is sufficient on a local workstation. In addition, the substantially higher number steps to handle is also a source of further difficulty in understanding the process, not only when something goes wrong, but also in terms of reproducibility of the results. The difficulty is not limited to software engineering. Consider the context of electronic structure calculations of materials based on the widely used Kohn-Sham Den-sity Functional Theory [18] (DFT). In atomistic modeling based on electronic structure calculations, a scientifically meaningful result depends on a coherent chain of mod-eling decisions: how the system is built, the approxima-tions used for electron interactions (choice of exchange– 

> arXiv:2604.22571v1 [physics.comp-ph] 24 Apr 2026

2 

> FIG. 1. ReAct (Reasoning and Acting) loop [21] at the foun-dation of agentic AI. The inner reasoning monologue of the LLM produces text that corresponds with specific tool calls. These tool calls perform actions, which result in structured observations being injected into the LLM’s context for further reasoning. The missing piece addressed by this work is the integration of HPC.

correlation functional), the treatment of atomic cores and spin, the numerical accuracy settings, and the analysis of the results must all be compatible with one another [19]. A workflow that is syntactically correct may still be sci-entifically wrong. This makes atomistic simulation par-ticularly demanding for agentic AI — correctness must be established at the level of the computational method, not only at the level of code generation. Existing approaches primarily focus on improving gen-eration quality through prompt engineering, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), or iterative interaction loops [13, 14]. Among other techniques, RAG has emerged for improving reliability by grounding genera-tion in external knowledge sources [20]. In scientific ap-plications, RAG can leverage curated datasets such as training materials, documentation, and previous work-flows to reduce hallucinations and improve consistency. While these strategies improve the relevance of the gener-ated code, they do not provide guarantees of correctness prior to execution. In particular, they cannot capture do-main specific dynamic constraints related to simulation setup, resource allocation, or domain-specific validity. This issue becomes especially visible when one moves beyond a fixed tool-calling scenario. A narrowly de-fined tool interface may be sufficient for a predetermined task, but realistic scientific exploration quickly requires methodological branching. For instance, during a DFT study, one may need to rethink the choice of model sys-tem, change the approximations used for the description of atoms’ core electrons and nuclei (pseudopotential fam-ilies), compare open- and closed-shell references, perform convergence studies, or introduce a new post-processing steps in response to intermediate results. Such adapta-tions are routine for expert practitioners, but are difficult to encode in advance through static tools. In this work, we introduce LARA-HPC , a validation-driven agentic framework designed to bridge this gap. The key idea is to shift from a generation-first paradigm to a validation-first approach (“Look Before You Leap”). This is achieved by combining: 1) a controlled HPC exe-cution layer based on our Python remotemanager pack-age to address operational and scheduling constraints; 2) simulation-native validation utilizing a “dry-run” primi-tive; and 3) a multi-phase agentic pipeline allowing for workflow generation and iterative refinement. The dry-run primitive refers to running a computer program in a way that the code only validates the input and provides information about the process to be exe-cuted (an example of this feature is in the Linux utility 

rsync ). Unlike static analysis, dry-run evaluation lever-ages the internal logic of the simulation code to detect errors in input configuration, resource requirements, or physical consistency, without the cost of a full calcula-tion. This enables iterative refinement in which work-flows are progressively corrected until they satisfy all val-idation criteria and are ready for safe submission. We showcase this approach by executing full atomistic simulation workflows on HPC, applying LARA-HPC to orchestrate DFT based simulations with the BigDFT 

program [22]. BigDFT is an ab-initio electronic struc-ture code. It is built for extreme-scale HPC systems, using linear-scaling algorithms and efficient paralleliza-tion to simulate very large systems, making it relevant for exascale computing architectures. Two representative atomistic simulation tasks will be presented: 1) the calcu-lation of the atomization enthalpy of a molecular system and 2) surface adsorption energies of a large system. Our experiments demonstrate how an agentic system incor-porating dry-run validation and structured feedback can identify incorrect API usage, missing inputs, and incon-sistent physical settings before production execution. We argue that such validation-driven paradigms are essential for ensuring correctness, reproducibility, and efficient use of computational resources in future copiloted research.   

> II. HPC ORCHESTRATION WITH REMOTEMANAGER
> AND MODEL CONTEXT PROTOCOL

Before introducing LARA-HPC itself, it is important to describe the execution substrate on which the frame-work relies. In our view, the first challenge in connect-ing agentic systems to atomistic simulation campaigns is not code generation, but the controlled exposure of HPC resources. An AI system should not directly ma-nipulate login shells, schedulers, filesystem paths, or ad hoc environment configuration. Instead, these interac-tions should be mediated through a reproducible and au-ditable orchestration layer. For this purpose, we build on remotemanager [23], a lightweight Python middleware designed to promote local Python functions into remotely executable tasks on HPC resources. The key design prin-3ciple of remotemanager is to preserve the standard user workflow of scientific computing — batch scripts, file staging, remote execution, and result retrieval — while expressing it through a programmatic interface. In this way, the library does not replace nor circumvent the logic of HPC usage, but formalizes it. The core abstraction of remotemanager is that an or-dinary Python function can be promoted into a remote procedure call enveloped in a user defined execution en-vironment (executables, libraries, data, etc). The user first specifies a jobscript template adapted to the target machine. This template contains the scheduler directives and execution environment, but also exposes a controlled set of tunable parameters such as the number of nodes, MPI ranks per node, and OpenMP threads. Listing 1 illustrates this first step. 

Listing 1. A jobscript template of supercomputer Fugaku (a petascale supercomputer at the RIKEN Center for Computa-tional Science in Kobe, Japan) for use with remotemanager .Optional parameters such as the number of nodes, MPI ranks per node, and OpenMP threads are explicitly exposed. The jobscript defines the execution environment by loading mod-ules, running containers, setting environment variables, etc (in this case, through a conda virtual environment). 

> template = """#!/bin/bash -l #PJM --mpi `max-proc-per-node=#MPI#' #PJM -L `elapse=2:00:00' #PJM -L `node=#NODES#' #PJM -L `rscgrp=small' #PJM -g ra000000 export OMP_NUM_THREADS=#OMP# # Example of environment initialization on the target resource eval "$($DATADIR/bin/micromamba shell hook --shell bash)" micromamba activate remote"""

This template-based design is important for two rea-sons. First, it reflects how production HPC jobs are ac-tually launched: the scheduler remains the entry point, rather than an opaque service layer. Second, it makes resource selection explicit and inspectable. The agent or higher-level workflow may choose values for exposed pa-rameters, but it cannot arbitrarily redefine the structure of the batch script. Once the template is defined, the user instantiates a 

remotemanager computer object, completes the machine-specific configuration, and promotes the Python func-tion (Listing 2). The promoted function can then be invoked from the local Python session as if it were a nor-mal function, while remotemanager transparently han-dles file transfer, job submission, remote execution, and result collection. 

Listing 2. Configuring a remote machine and promoting a BigDFT single-point calculation of H 2O for remote execution on supercomputer Fugaku.                  

> Fugaku = Computer(template=template, host="fugaku.r-ccs.riken.jp", submitter="pjsub") Fugaku.nodes = 1 Fugaku.mpi = 1 Fugaku.omp = 48 @SanzuFunction(url=Fugaku)
> def run_water_energy(hgrid=0.4, dry_run=False):
> from BigDFT.Systems import System
> from BigDFT.Fragments import Fragment
> from BigDFT.Atoms import Atom
> from BigDFT.Inputfiles import Inputfile
> from BigDFT.Calculators import SystemCalculator sys = System() sys["WAT:0"] = Fragment([ Atom({"O": [0.0, 0.0, 0.0], "units": "bohr"}), Atom({"H": [1.43, 1.11, 0.0], "units": "bohr"}), Atom({"H": [1.43, -1.11, 0.0], "units": "bohr"}), ]) inp = Inputfile() inp.set_xc("PBE") inp.set_hgrid(hgrid) code = SystemCalculator(dry_run=dry_run) log = code.run(sys=sys, input =inp, name="water")
> return getattr (log, "energy", None) run_water_energy(hgrid=0.35, dry_run=True)

Conceptually, the promoted function defines the scien-tific payload , while remotemanager supplies the execution protocol . This separation is particularly useful in atom-istic simulations, where scientific code such as BigDFT 

may evolve rapidly but the operational steps of HPC ex-ecution remain comparatively stable. 

A. Operational role of remotemanager 

At execution time, remotemanager carries out the se-quence of actions that a human user would otherwise perform manually. These typically include: 1. materializing a batch script from the selected tem-plate, 2. staging input files and Python sources to the re-mote resource, 3. submitting the job to the scheduler, 4. monitoring completion, 5. retrieving output files, return values, and execution logs. A major strength of this approach is that it does not require any daemon or privileged service on the remote machine. The remote side only needs the standard tools already available to HPC users, such as a shell environ-ment, scheduler commands, and secure file transfer. This makes the approach portable across production systems and compatible with the security constraints of real HPC centers. The design also means that remotemanager 

is not tied to any particularly job scheduling software. Equally important is the fact that remotemanager cap-tures not only the nominal return value of the remote function, but also standard output, standard error, and execution artifacts. This is essential in scientific settings, where failed runs are often as informative as successful ones, and where debugging requires visibility into the ex-act job context. 4

B. Towards an HPC tool call 

While remotemanager provides the execution sub-strate, it does not by itself define how an LLM or AI agent should access these capabilities. For that interface layer, we use the Model Context Protocol ( MCP ), which standardizes the exposure of structured tool calls to large language models. In a typical MCP server based on Python, a function is annotated and published as a tool. The function signature and docstring become part of the semantic interface presented to the model. When this mechanism is combined with remotemanager , an MCP 

tool call can be mapped onto a remote HPC submission. Listing 3 illustrates this composition. 

Listing 3. Exposing the same H 2O single-point routine as an 

MCP tool while keeping the remote resource configuration explicit. Here we use the FastMCP library (gofastmcp.com).   

> mcp = FastMCP("Example Server") @mcp.tool()
> def water_single_point(hgrid, dry_run, omp, mpi, nodes): """ Run a BigDFT single-point calculation for H2O. Args: hgrid: real-space grid spacing. dry_run: use BigDFT dry-run validation mode. omp: number of OpenMP threads to use. mpi: number of MPI ranks per node. nodes: number of nodes to use. """ Fugaku.nodes = nodes ; Fugaku.mpi = mpi ; Fugaku.omp = omp
> return run_water_energy(hgrid=hgrid, dry_run=dry_run)

This functionality composition is the key bridge be-tween agentic reasoning and production HPC campaigns. The LLM does not receive shell access, scheduler access, or arbitrary filesystem access. Instead, it sees a con-strained set of tools with well-defined parameters. Each invocation is then converted into an auditable batch sub-mission by remotemanager .

C. Strengths and limitations of the MCP approach 

The MCP with remotemanager combination already solves a substantial part of the AI–HPC integration prob-lem. It provides a secure and realistic path for exposing supercomputing resources to an external reasoning sys-tem without compromising the operational model of the target platform. However, this approach also reveals a structural limitation. Each exposed MCP tool corre-sponds to a predefined function and therefore to a prede-fined workflow pattern. This is suitable for repetitive or narrowly scoped tasks, but it becomes restrictive when the scientific workflow must adapt dynamically. One so-lution would be to provide an agentic framework with a broad range of built in tools [12], however even this may fail to cover the dynamic use cases pursued by expert simulation scientists. This limitation may be stated more concretely through the example of molecular atomization energies. Comput-ing an atomization energy is conceptually simple, but the workflow requires coordinated calculations for the molecule and its isolated constituent atoms, with a con-sistent choice of exchange–correlation functional, spin configuration, boundary conditions, numerical parame-ters, and post-processing conventions. Small method-ological changes, such as switching pseudopotential fam-ilies or tightening convergence parameters, can alter the resulting quantity appreciably. Within an MCP -based framework, one could expose a tool for building a molecular system, another for run-ning a BigDFT calculation, and a final one for aggre-gating energies. Such a setup is sufficient for a sin-gle pre-planned workflow. But as soon as the scientific question evolves to include alternative pseudopotentials, open-shell atomic references, all-electron variants, or con-vergence scans over grid spacing and localization radii, the number of required tool variants grows rapidly. The agent can only choose among the interfaces that were ex-plicitly designed in advance; it cannot introduce a new methodological branch on its own. For this reason, we regard the MCP plus 

remotemanager layer not as a complete solution, but as the indispensable execution backbone on top of which a more flexible system can be built. In the next section, we introduce LARA-HPC , which retains the controlled HPC interaction offered by remotemanager 

while replacing static workflow definitions by validated, retrieval-guided code generation. 

III. LARA-HPC ARCHITECTURE 

The central limitation of the HPC tools approach, as discussed in the previous section, is its reliance on pre-defined actions. While this ensures safety and repro-ducibility, it restricts the ability of AI agents to construct workflows dynamically. In practice, simulation based re-search often requires the composing of new steps and logic to encompass and expanding set of hypotheses and scientific questions. This motivates the introduction of a higher-level reasoning layer capable of generating and refining workflows while preserving the controlled inter-action with HPC resources. Our architectural choice is guided by a principle of minimal sufficient autonomy [24]: the agent should be as flexible as needed for scientific reasoning, but no more autonomous than is operationally safe in an HPC setting. A fully deterministic pipeline is too rigid for open-ended scientific requests, while a fully autonomous agent with direct execution authority would be difficult to justify in a high-consequence environment where an incorrect job may waste substantial computational re-sources [25, 26]. LARA-HPC therefore adopts a staged design in which creative reasoning, deterministic valida-tion, and controlled execution are explicitly separated. This positioning is also consistent with recent practical guidance on agent construction [24, 27], improving, in passing, also the traceability of the approach. 5USER REQUEST 

> Natural language
> PHASE 1 : UNDERSTANDING
> LLM-as-Tools
> Intent Extraction
> Parse user query
> Physics
> Parameters
> Extract scientific
> params
> Module Mapping
> Map to BigDFT
> modules
> PHASE 2 : GENERATION
> Generator agent
> RAG Search
> Find revelant
> examples
> Code generation
> Choose code
> template
> Parameter Filling
> Populate with values
> PHASE 3 : VALIDATION
> Multi-Level Automated Checks
> Structure
> (PyBigDFT)
> Validate API
> PHASE 4 : REVIEW
> Critic Agent
> Intent vs Code
> Verify alignment
> Best Practices
> Code quality
> check
> Improvements
> Suggest optimizations
> Dry run
> DIFFERENT PROMPT + OPTIONAL DIFFERENT LLM
> If issues found – Return to PHASE 2 with feedback
> VALIDATED CODE
> RemoteManager submit
> If issues found – Return to PHASE 2 with feedback
> Syntax (AST)
> Parse code
> structure
> LLM > 400B
> No LLM
> LLM > 20B

FIG. 2. LARA-HPC architecture. A user request is trans-formed through successive phases of understanding, genera-tion, validation, and review, before producing validated code executed via remotemanager .

A. Overview of the LARA Workflow 

LARA-HPC is structured as a multi-phase pipeline that transforms a natural language request into a vali-dated and executable workflow. The architecture is illus-trated in Fig. 2. The workflow is decomposed into four main phases: 1. Understanding : extraction of scientific intent and mapping to domain-specific modules. 2. Generation : construction of candidate workflows using templates and retrieval. 3. Validation : multi-level verification including syn-tax, API, physical constraints, and dry-run execu-tion. 4. Review : higher-level critique and optimization of the generated workflow. This structured decomposition allows separating con-cerns between semantic interpretation, code generation, correctness verification, and optimization. The decomposition also reflects distinct failure modes. Misunderstanding the user request leads to an inappro-priate workflow family; hallucinations during generation lead to incorrect code or invalid API usage; subtle sci-entific inconsistencies survive syntax checks but are ex-posed by domain validation; and workflows that are for-mally correct may still be suboptimal or misaligned with the original intent. The four-phase structure is intended to address each of these failure modes with a dedicated mechanism rather than a single monolithic agent prompt. A similar phasing strategy has been adopted by the agen-tic system “The AI Scientist” — a pipeline that achieves the vision of full end-to-end automation of the scientific process [9]. The AI Scientist sequentially completes four main phases covering idea generation, tree-based experi-mentation, manuscript writing and reviewing. A further design principle of LARA-HPC is the sepa-ration of cognitive labor across models of different sizes (highlighted by different colors in Fig. 2). The most de-manding reasoning step — translating a scientific prob-lem into physically meaningful parameters, understand-ing domain equations, and selecting the right computa-tional strategy — is handled by a single large model. This frontier model brings the broad scientific knowledge and deep reasoning capacity required to interpret quan-tum chemistry or electronic-structure problems correctly. Leveraging different LLM models at various stages and for different agent tasks is a common practice in agentic systems to best utilize specific skills (reasoning, coding, vision-language tasks) and to optimize costs [9]. A model with strong tool calling capabilities can also be utilized to dynamically orchestrate the four stage workflow. Once this high-level physical reasoning is complete and the simulation parameters are established, subsequent well-scoped subtasks steps are delegated to smaller, faster, and cheaper models. 

B. Phase 1: Scientific Understanding 

The first phase transforms the user request, expressed in natural language, into structured scientific informa-tion. This includes extraction of intent (e.g., energy cal-culation, structural relaxation), identification of relevant physical parameters, and mapping to available modules in the target simulation framework (e.g., BigDFT ). This step is critical because scientific workflows cannot be con-structed solely from syntactic patterns: they require a correct interpretation of domain-specific concepts. The output of this phase is a structured representation of the problem, which serves as input for workflow generation. In practical deployments, this phase also provides a natural location for clarification when the user request is underspecified. For example, an atomization-energy cal-culation may require the system to determine whether geometry optimization is intended, which pseudopoten-tial family should be used, or whether open-shell refer-ence atoms must be considered explicitly. Resolving such 6ambiguities before generation prevents avoidable down-stream errors, and is consistent with recent guidance on human-in-the-loop agent design [24, 25].  

> C. Phase 2: Workflow Generation

The generation phase constructs candidate workflows by combining retrieval and templating mechanisms. It consists of three main steps: • Retrieval (RAG) : relevant examples and docu-mentation are retrieved from a curated knowledge base. • Code generation : a candidate function is gener-ated according to a specific code template. • Parameter filling : the source code is incorpo-rated into a structured message incorporating out-put from the previous stages. This approach ensures that generated workflows re-main anchored to known usage patterns, reducing the likelihood of hallucinated or inconsistent code. A com-mon approach for grounding LLM responses in domain-specific knowledge is retrieval-augmented generation, where relevant documentation chunks are fetched at in-ference time and injected into the model’s context. This strategy works well when the knowledge base is large and dynamic, as it avoids overwhelming the context window with irrelevant information. Another viable solution is represented by always-on memory (see Ref. [28, 29] for discussions of agent memory). In this approach, domain tutorials are manually ingested into the model’s persis-tent memory, tested against representative tasks, and refined until the model consistently produces correct re-sults. This validated memory is then deployed as a static knowledge context throughout the workflow. However, at this stage, correctness is not guaranteed. The generated workflow is only a candidate that must be validated before execution. This phase is intentionally more expressive than static tool-calling. It allows the system to construct new workflow logic when required by the scientific question, for example by adding atomic reference calculations, convergence loops, or parameter comparisons that were not hard-coded as independent tools.  

> D. Phase 3: Multi-Level Validation

The validation phase is the core innovation of LARA-HPC . It introduces a layered verification process that progressively ensures the correctness of the generated workflow. The role of validation is therefore not to re-place generation, but to make this added expressivity safe enough for scientific use. In this sense, the architecture is closer to an agentic RAG workflow than to a static retrieval pipeline [30]. The validation pipeline includes: • Syntactic validation : parsing of the abstract syntax tree (AST). • Structural validation : verification of API usage (e.g., through BigDFT’s Python interfaces). • Dry-run execution : evaluation of the workflow and its resource requirements using simulation code validation modes. The dry-run step is particularly important, as it enables the detection of runtime and semantic errors without in-curring the cost of full HPC execution. If issues are de-tected, structured feedback is generated and the workflow is returned to the generation phase for correction. This creates an iterative refinement loop that continues until the workflow satisfies all validation criteria.  

> E. Phase 4: Critical Review

In addition to automated validation, LARA-HPC in-cludes a review phase driven by a dedicated agent. This phase operates with a potentially different prompt or even a different model, and focuses on higher-level as-pects, such as alignment between user intent and gen-erated code, adherence to best practices or identifica-tion of possible optimizations. This step is not strictly required for correctness, but improves the overall qual-ity and robustness of the workflow. It introduces a sec-ond level of reasoning that complements the validation phase. Although the present version does not yet im-plement this phase end-to-end, we keep it in the archi-tecture because scientific acceptability is broader than executability. A workflow can pass dry-run validation and still be methodologically weak, unnecessarily expen-sive, or poorly aligned with the actual question being asked. The review phase is intended to capture precisely this distinction, and follows the broader generator-critic pattern explored in recent self-refinement work [31].  

> F. Key Design Principles

Once a workflow has successfully passed validation and review, it is considered safe for execution. At this stage, the code is submitted to the HPC environment through remotemanager . This final step closes the loop between agentic reasoning and production execution. Im-portantly, the agent never interacts directly with the HPC system: all operations are mediated through the 

remotemanager layer described in Section II. Everything happens on the local user’s workstation. The architecture of LARA-HPC is guided by three key principles: • Separation of concerns : reasoning, validation, and execution are handled by distinct components. 7• Validation-first design : workflows must be veri-fied before execution. • Controlled interaction : all HPC operations are mediated through well-defined interfaces. These principles ensure that flexibility in workflow gen-eration does not compromise the reliability and repro-ducibility required for HPC-based scientific computing.  

> IV. DRY-RUN DRIVEN VALIDATION

A central component of the LARA-HPC framework is the integration of a dry-run execution mode, which enables the validation of simulation workflows prior to their actual execution on HPC resources. Unlike tra-ditional static validation approaches, the dry-run mech-anism in BigDFT is implemented directly within the execution pipeline of the simulation code, allowing for domain-aware verification of inputs. In BigDFT , the dry-run mode can be triggered in two complementary ways: • through the Python API, by calling the run() 

method of the calculator with the keyword argu-ment dry_run=True ,• through the environment, by setting the variable 

BIGDFT_MPIDRYRUN , which redirects execution to a dedicated dry-run executable. The value of the variable corresponds to the number of MPI pro-cesses the simulation will use. In both cases, the dry-run mode modifies the execution pathway of the calculation. When dry-run is activated, the standard BigDFT executable is replaced by a spe-cialized tool that performs a simulation of the execution, including input parsing and internal setup, but does not allocate the computational resources required for a full self-consistent field (SCF) calculation. The dry-run mechanism is not an external checker, but is embedded within the same execution pipeline used for actual simulations. It thereby provides a rich set of validation capabilities that go beyond simple syntactic checks. These include: • Input validation : parsing and verification of in-put files. • Structural consistency : validation of parameter dictionaries and required fields. • Physical setup : construction of internal data structures such as grids, basis functions, and pseu-dopotentials. • Resource estimation : evaluation of memory re-quirements based on system size and parallel con-figuration. In particular, the memory estimation step provides a quantitative assessment of the feasibility of the simu-lation under given HPC conditions. The resulting logs contain a Memory Consumption Report , which is explic-itly checked in the calculator implementation to confirm that the dry-run completed successfully. This level of validation enables the detection of errors that would oth-erwise only appear during execution, such as inconsistent parameter combinations or infeasible resource require-ments. It further provides feedbacks to the agentic sys-tem concerning the optimal allocation of HPC resources. The dry-run execution produces standard output and log files that are processed in the same way as full runs. The calculator inspects debug files and log timestamps to determine whether the execution was successful. In case of failure, detailed error information is retrieved from dedicated debug files and reported back to the user or calling system. This mechanism provides structured feedback that can be directly used by the LARA-HPC 

validation loop to refine the workflow. Unlike generic error messages, these diagnostics are grounded in the in-ternal logic of the simulation code, making them partic-ularly valuable for automated correction. A key advantage of the dry-run mode is its low compu-tational cost. Since no full SCF cycle is performed, the execution time is negligible compared to a production run, even for large systems. This makes it possible to in-voke dry-run repeatedly within an iterative loop without impacting HPC resource usage. This property is essential for LARA-HPC , where validation is performed multiple times during the generation-refinement cycle. The dry-run thus acts as a fast and reliable oracle for workflow correctness. Within the LARA-HPC architecture (Section III), the dry-run constitutes the final stage of the validation phase. It complements earlier checks such as syntax parsing and API validation by providing an execution-level verification grounded in the simulation code itself. This integration enables a shift from static validation to 

simulation-native validation . Instead of attempting to predict correctness from code structure alone, LARA-HPC relies on the simulation engine to evaluate the va-lidity of the workflow. As a result, only workflows that pass the dry-run validation are submitted to execution through remotemanager , guaranteeing a high level of re-liability in production campaigns.  

> V. USE CASE: VALIDATION-DRIVEN WORKFLOW GENERATION

To illustrate the capabilities of the LARA-HPC 

framework, we present concrete use cases (atomization energy and surface binding) based on an implementa-tion of the architecture described in Section III. This implementation focuses on the generation and validation of atomistic simulation workflows using BigDFT , and is designed as a minimal yet representative instance of the 8overall architecture. The implementation considered in this work realizes the LARA-HPC pipeline up to Phase 3 (Validation) 

of Fig. 2. The RAG component is implemented using ma-terials from a BigDFT training event, which provide rep-resentative examples of input configurations and work-flows. This choice ensures that generated code remains consistent with established usage patterns while keeping the implementation lightweight. We use Google’s GEM-INI 2.5 Flash [32] as the smaller, stage-specific LLM; 

gemini-embedding-001 as the embedding model; and An-thropic’s Sonnet 4.6 as the frontier model. This section demonstrates that scientific workflow generation can be coupled to simulation-native validation in a way that catches meaningful errors before production execution. The goal of the use case is not to claim exhaustive au-tomation, but to show that the validation loop materially changes what kinds of workflows can be trusted. 

A. Illustrative Error Detection and Correction 

To provide a concrete understanding of the validation-driven workflow, we present representative examples of errors generated during the atomization workflow con-struction and their subsequent correction through the 

LARA-HPC pipeline. 

API Misuse A common class of errors arises from in-correct usage of the simulation API. For instance, the generated workflow may import a nonexisting/mispelled Python module. During the validation phase, this er-ror is detected either at the structural validation level or during dry-run execution, producing an error message indicating that the module does not exist. Another con-crete example concerns dynamic self-correction after an 

AttributeError . Starting from a natural-language re-quest to construct a water molecule in a periodic box and return its center of mass, the agent first produced an in-valid call to System.get_center_of_mass() . The dry-run stage intercepted the error, after which the genera-tion phase consulted the indexed documentation and re-placed the invalid method by the valid System.centroid 

attribute. The corrected workflow then executed success-fully and returned a coordinate vector. This example shows the intended control loop: failure is not hidden, but converted into structured feedback that triggers a focused repair. 

Missing Input Parameters Another frequent issue concerns incomplete or inconsistent input definitions, such as missing keys in the input data. The dry-run ex-ecution detects missing required fields (e.g., atomic po-sitions or pseudopotentials), leading to a failure at the input parsing stage. 

Physically Inconsistent Parameters More subtle er-rors involve inconsistent configurations. A representative example is a spin-polarized calculation on a single hydro-gen atom with an impossible total magnetic moment:       

> from BigDFT.Database.Molecules import get_molecule
> from BigDFT.Inputfiles import Inputfile sys = get_molecule("H") inp = Inputfile() inp.set_xc("PBE") inp.set_hgrid(0.4) inp.spin_polarize(2)

This configuration is syntactically valid Python and uses the correct API, but it violates a physical constraint be-cause a one-electron system cannot sustain a total spin polarization of two. In the executable validation path, BigDFT reports the issue explicitly: 

> ERROR: some problem occured during the execution of the command The error occured is BIGDFT_INPUT_VARIABLES_ERROR Additional Info: Spin-Polarized calculation (nspin= 2). The mpol polarization should be less than the number of electrons (mpol=2 and nel= 1)

The corrected workflow simply restores a physically ad-missible polarization. These examples highlight the multi-level nature of the 

LARA-HPC validation process. Errors are not only syntactic but also structural and physical. The dry-run mechanism plays a central role in detecting issues that cannot be inferred from code inspection alone. By iteratively correcting such errors, the system converges toward workflows that are both syntactically valid and scientifically meaningful. This illustrates the transition from a generative paradigm to a validation-driven con-struction process. The spin polarization failure raises at the same time also a general crucial point: LARA-HPC 

relies on the robustness of a code with respect to excep-tions handlings and error descriptions. LARA-HPC was able to set the proper spin for hydrogen since BigDFT 

makes users aware of the proper correlation of spin state and available electrons. This example point to the need of having a specific dry run tool, designed by the devel-opers of the code into which the HPC campaign should run, that will be consumed by the agent to meet required validation criteria. The ability of the software developer will be then in being capable to design such a tool in a suitable way to inform HPC campaigns and relevant worflows actions. 

B. Why Atomization Energy Matters as a Use Case 

Beyond these local error-correction examples, the broader scientific motivation for LARA-HPC is the han-dling of workflows whose difficulty lies in methodological branching rather than in syntax alone. Atomization en-ergies provide a compact example. To compute them cor-rectly, the agent must coordinate molecular and atomic calculations, preserve the same exchange–correlation and numerical settings across all runs, choose appropriate ref-erence spin states for isolated atoms, and often explore variants such as pseudopotential family or convergence parameters. In a static tool-calling framework, each of these sci-entific variants require an explicit new tool or a more complex interface. In a generation-based framework, the 9agent can instead synthesize the required workflow struc-ture on demand. The price of this flexibility is that the resulting code must be validated much more carefully. For this reason, atomization energy is not merely a chem-istry example — it is a representative stress test for the central claim of this paper, namely that scientific use-fulness requires more expressivity than fixed tools, but HPC safety requires more discipline than unconstrained code generation. Using LARA-HPC to generate a code that converges the atomization energies revealed another limitation of a predefined tool approach. BigDFT represents the elec-tronic structure using wavelets, which support a multires-olution approach. Around each atom, a coarse-grained region with lower resolution reduces computational cost, and its size can be adjusted via the set_rmult() func-tion. The key point is not the specific parameter, but the fact that the system had to modify workflow logic rather than merely fill slots in a pre-existing interface (Listing 4). 

Listing 4. Excerpt of a validated code modification gener-ated by LARA-HPC when extending a BigDFT workflow to accept crmult through set_rmult() .        

> def input_template(xc='PBE', hgrid=0.35, **kwargs):
> from BigDFT.Inputfiles import Inputfile inp0 = Inputfile() inp0.set_xc(xc) inp0.set_hgrid(hgrid) inp_spec = {'XC': xc, 'h': hgrid}
> if 'crmult' in kwargs: crmult_value = kwargs.pop('crmult') inp0.set_rmult(crmult_value) inp_spec['rmult'] = crmult_value
> return inp0, inp_spec

One possible solution is to create a fully general inter-face exposing all possible input options. Another would be to allow the agent to first generate an input file that is sent to the MCP server. Both of these solutions place a heavy burden on prompt engineering to ensure the agent properly manages an enormous array of possible in-put options and all of their dynamic constraints. Thus, the LARA-HPC approach is to enable the generation of validated, programmatic workflows in the context of the most relevant documentation and physics consider-ations. Once the workflow passes all validation steps, it can be safely executed on HPC resources using the 

remotemanager interface described in Section II. At this stage, the workflow is no longer a speculative generated code, but a verified simulation procedure that has been tested under realistic conditions. 

C. Validation Driven HPC 

To connect AI agents to HPC resources for predefined workflows, it is sufficient to use remotemanager as glue code through the scheme in Listings 2 and 3. However, the purpose for LARA-HPC is to enable autonomous AI assistants to run novel, computationally demanding calculations having validated the workflow locally. As a demonstration of this point, the orchestrating agent is prompted with the following query: 

> Inside the data directory there is a XYZ file. I want to calculate the binding energy of the water molecule to the surface in that geometry using the PBE functional.

In this scenario, the LLM is provided with an anatase/water structure composed of 291 atoms [33]. The agent reaches the dry run phase and then responds to the user with the following information: 

> The slab calculations are large (~200 GB peak per process at hgrid=0.37). This is a 291-atom TiO2 slab - you will need a significant HPC allocation with many MPI processes to make the memory per process tractable.

The table of memory requirements generated in the LLMs response are listed in Table I. As the dry run tool allows the agent to specify the number of MPI ranks, we then ask the orchestrating agent: 

> I plan to run this on supercomputer Fugaku. The calculation should be run with 4 MPI per node. Each node can safely use approximately 26 GB. Using dry run, tell me how many nodes I should use for this calculation.

The agent performs two dry run tool calls to generate the required data. It then responds to the user:  

> Recommendation: use 10 nodes (40 MPI processes, 4 per node). This gives ~1.2 GB of headroom per process on the worst-case calculation (slab+water). If you want a more comfortable margin, 12 nodes (48 MPI) would bring the peak to ~4,560 MB/process, leaving ~2.1 GB free per process.

Thus, the dry-run approach provides a guard against the agent executing underprovisioned calculations. This saves the high latency work of finding a suitable calcula-tion setup with each experiment going through the super-computer queue and wasting computational resources. 

VI. DISCUSSION: TOWARD A CO-PILOTED HPC ECOSYSTEM 

The results presented in this work highlight a key lim-itation of current AI-assisted scientific workflows: while modern large language models are highly effective at gen-erating code, they lack the mechanisms required to en-sure correctness and reproducibility in high-performance computing environments. By contrast, scientific simula-tions demand strict guarantees on input validity, resource usage, and physical consistency. In this work, we intro-duced LARA-HPC , a validation-driven agentic frame-work designed to enable reliable generation of atomistic simulation workflows in HPC environments. By combin-ing a controlled execution layer based on remotemanager 

with simulation-native validation through the dry-run ca-pabilities of BigDFT , we argued for a shift from gener-ative AI workflows to a validation-first paradigm. In principle, users may manage their atomistic simu-lations using any of the highly general agentic systems available today (coding agents, “claws”, etc). These agents can run arbitrary commands, connect arbitrary 10                     

> TABLE I. Memory analysis produced by the AI agent for calculating the slab system. The subcaptions, headers, and entries are all verbatim taken from the agent’s output. (a) Memory estimates per component (1 process dry-run)
> Calculation Wavefunction Memory Estimated Peak
> slab + water (291 atoms) ∼1784 MB ∼197 GB bare slab (288 atoms) ∼1629 MB ∼195 GB water molecule (3 atoms) ∼1.5 MB ∼136 MB (b) Memory per MPI process — slab+water (the bottleneck)
> MPI Processes Nodes (@ 4 MPI/node) Peak / Process Limit / Process Fits?
> 32 86,935 MB 6,656 MB 7
> 40 10 5,473 MB 6,656 MB ✓

systems, and generate arbitrary code. However, this extreme degree of non-deterministic behavior risks the wasting of precious computational resources on the pro-duction of scientifically meaningless results. When cor-rect results are achieved, they will only come after long and costly trial-and-error loops. In fact, this iterate until correctness approach is the common strategy of current AI agents — one that is effective only if the resource use, latency of trials, and safety risks are low. Even when such a approach finally succeeds, human-in-the-loop would not be a warranted feature. Preserving traceable tool calling and well automated relationships between tool/phases of a production process will also ensure reproducibility of the scientific tasks. For example, we noted in Sec. II A that remotemanager 

works by performing the same actions as a human user would; from this, we know that a general AI agent is also capable of connecting to a remote machine, creating and submitting jobscripts, checking for results, etc. For a given HPC resource or DFT program, when the un-derlying model is not sufficiently trained on the specific documentation, today’s agents can search the web and gather the required information. Yet each of these setup steps delays achieving the goals of the scientific project. The benefit of providing suitable tooling is to be sure the agent does not need to waste time nor its context window on discovering the correct set of workflow operations. Another weak point of deploying general agent systems is that each step in the research process becomes depen-dent on a frontier quality model. This may not be desire-able due to the high costs and security risks that come with using commerical providers. Such an approach is also sensitive to changes to models made outside of the user’s control, which may disrupt a given workflow. The modular LARA architecture separates stages by the qual-ity of engine required (Fig. 2), with tight inner reasoning loops accomplished using smaller models. The code that is generated becomes independent of any given model, al-lowing the workflow to be executed (even with a manual process) reproducibily in the future. A simple solution to the weak points of general agents is to package predefined tools suitable for steps in a sci-entific workflow. For example, the composition of the model context protocol and remotemanager allows users to easily define tools that perform atomistic simulations using HPC resources. In addition to formalizing these steps to ensure immediate correctness and a separation of concerns, providing tools serves as a form of prompt engi-neering [34] — biasing agent actions towards approaches it may not immediately produce under standard operat-ing conditions. The drawback of this approach is that predefined tools are scientifically constraining. In research, the challenge is often not merely choosing among existing actions, but constructing a workflow variant that was not fully con-ceived in advance due to an evolving hypothesis. To allow for the full expressiveness of new procedural patterns, while ensuring controlled and correct execution, we in-troduce the LARA-HPC AI system based on a domain specific, multi-agent loop. In addition to the dynamic prompting made possible by a multiphase workflow in-corporating physics reasoning and RAG, LARA-HPC 

is centered on a dry-run primitive that enables reliable validation of proposed workflows with low latency and resource use. Based on these experiences, we argue that it is now the task of the broader computational physics commu-nity to develop shared knowledge on developing agentic systems suitable for its specific research requirements. These systems may come in the form of MCP servers, agent SKILL files, tools to be inserted in Agent Client Protocol schemes, or full packages like LARA-HPC . The community’s frameworks would then be integrated into end-to-end agentic systems like The AI Scientist [9] and others [35–40], which are designed to autonomously con-duct all distinct phases of scientific research — research ideas, writes code, run experiments, plot and analyze data, write scientific manuscripts, and perform peer re-view. Recent research suggests that the length of tasks AI can reliably complete is doubling roughly every seven months [41]. This implies that many of today’s imple-mentation and debugging limitations could be overcome 11 sooner than expected. Nevertheless, integrating domain specific systems into these advanced models will remain essential to reduce the increasingly dominate burden of tool calling on agentic science [42]. One such critical requirement will be the ability to operate these systems within a sandboxed environment .This environment must provide controlled access to sim-ulation software and associated data, HPC resources and scheduling systems, external AI services or locally de-ployed models. The sandbox ensures that all interac-tions are traceable, reproducible, and compliant with the constraints of the research context, including licensing restrictions and data confidentiality. Within this frame-work, LARA-HPC can be seen as an orchestration layer of the sandbox that connects state-of-the-art copilots, re-trieval systems, and validation tools, without being tied to a specific provider or model. This flexibility is essen-tial in scientific environments, where requirements vary widely across domains and institutions. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

W.D. acknowledges the FOCUS (Hyogo Prefecture, Kobe City) Project to Promote the Formation of a Re-search and Education Center (COE) in the Field of Com-putational Science. We acknowledge Eliott Jacopin for useful discussions. We thank E. Polack, D. Caliste, J. Janssen, C. Herrera-Contreras, T. Abui Degbotse, J. Briki, L. Didukh and the organizers of the 2025 LLM Hackaton for Materials Science and Chemistry for stim-ulating discussions and for providing momentum to the initiative. 

[1] M. Chen et al. , Evaluating large language models trained on code, arXiv:2107.03374 (2021). [2] J. Gottweis et al. , Towards an ai co-scientist, arXiv:2502.18864 (2025). [3] Y. Zimmermann et al. , 32 examples of llm applications in materials science and chemistry: towards automation, assistants, agents, and accelerated scientific discovery, Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 6, 030701 (2025). [4] Y. Zimmermann et al. , Reflections from the 2024 large language model (llm) hackathon for applications in ma-terials science and chemistry, arXiv:2411.15221 (2024). [5] N. Alampara et al. , General-purpose models for the chemical sciences: Llms and beyond, Chem. Rev. 126 ,2484 (2026). [6] I. Mandal et al. , Evaluating large language model agents for automation of atomic force microscopy, Nat. Com-mun. 16 , 64105 (2025). [7] A. M. Bran et al. , Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools, Nat. Mach. Intell. 6, 525 (2024). [8] A. Vriza et al. , Multi-agentic ai framework for end-to-end atomistic simulations, Digit. Discov. 5, 440 (2026). [9] C. Lu et al. , Towards end-to-end automation of AI re-search, Nature 651 , 914 (2026). [10] S. Gao et al. , Democratizing ai scientists using tooluni-verse, arXiv:2509.23426 (2025). [11] Y. Qu et al. , Crispr-gpt for agentic automation of gene-editing experiments, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 10 , 245 (2026). [12] Y. Zou et al. , El agente: An autonomous agent for quan-tum chemistry, Matter 8 (2025). [13] T. D. Pham, A. Tanikanti, and M. Keçeli, Chemgraph as an agentic framework for computational chemistry work-flows, Commun. Chem. 9, 33 (2026). [14] Q. Campbell, S. Cox, J. Medina, B. Watterson, and A. D. White, Mdcrow: automating molecular dynamics work-flows with large language models, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 7, 025037 (2026). [15] Z. Wang, H. Huang, H. Zhao, C. Xu, S. Zhu, J. Janssen, and V. Viswanathan, Dreams: Density functional theory based research engine for agentic materials simulation, arXiv:2507.14267 (2025). [16] E. Deelman, D. Gannon, M. Shields, and I. Taylor, Work-flows and e-science: An overview of workflow system fea-tures and capabilities, Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 25 ,528 (2009). [17] S. P. Huber et al. , Aiida 1.0, a scalable computational infrastructure for automated reproducible workflows and data provenance, Sci. Data. 7, 300 (2020). [18] R. M. Martin, Electronic structure: basic theory and practical methods (Cambridge university press, 2020). [19] V. Brázdová and D. R. Bowler, Atomistic Computer Sim-ulations: A Practical Guide (Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2013). [20] P. Lewis et al. , Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks, in Adv. Neural Inf. Pro-cess. Syst. , Vol. 33 (2020) pp. 9459–9474. [21] S. Yao et al. , React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, in The Eleventh Int. Conference. on Learn. Representations (2023). [22] L. E. Ratcliff, W. Dawson, G. Fisicaro, et al. , Flexibil-ities of wavelets as a computational basis set for large-scale electronic structure calculations, J. Chem. Phys. 

152 , 194110 (2020). [23] W. Dawson, L. Beal, L. E. Ratcliff, et al. , Exploratory data science on supercomputers for quantum mechanical calculations, Electron. Struct. 6, 027003 (2024). [24] A. Blount, A. Gulli, S. Saboo, M. Zimmermann, and V. Vuskovic, Introduction to agents, https://www. kaggle.com/whitepaper-introduction-to-agents 

(2025), kaggle/Google Whitepaper. Accessed: April 11, 2026. [25] L. Wang et al. , A survey on large language model based autonomous agents, Front. Comput. Sci. 18 , 186345 (2024). [26] Y. Gan et al. , Navigating the risks: A survey of se-curity, privacy, and ethics threats in llm-based agents, arXiv:2411.09523 (2024). [27] OpenAI, A practical guide to building agents, OpenAI Documentation, https://platform.openai.com/docs/ guides/agents (2024), accessed: April 11, 2026. 12 

[28] C. Packer et al. , Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems, arXiv:2310.08560 (2023). [29] W. Xu, Z. Liang, K. Mei, H. Gao, J. Tan, and Y. Zhang, A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents, arXiv:2502.12110 (2025). [30] A. Singh, A. Ehtesham, S. Kumar, and T. T. Khoei, Agentic retrieval-augmented generation: A survey on agentic rag, arXiv:2501.09136 (2025). [31] A. Madaan, N. Tandon, et al. , Self-refine: Iterative re-finement with self-feedback, in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , Vol. 36 (2023) pp. 46534–46594. [32] G. Comanici et al. , Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities, arXiv:2507.06261 (2025). [33] G. Fisicaro et al. , Wet environment effects for ethanol and water adsorption on anatase tio2 (101) surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C 124 , 2406 (2020). [34] P. Liu, W. Yuan, J. Fu, Z. Jiang, H. Hayashi, and G. Neu-big, Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language processing, ACM Comput. Surv. 55 (2023). [35] Y. Weng et al. , Deepscientist: Advancing frontier-pushing scientific findings progressively, in Fourteenth Int. Conference. Learn. Representations (2026). [36] Analemma Intelligence, FARS: Fully Automated Research System, https://analemma.ai/blog/ introducing-fars/ (2026), accessed: 2026-04-09. [37] Y. Lyu et al. , Evoscientist: Towards multi-agent evolv-ing ai scientists for end-to-end scientific discovery, arXiv:2603.08127 (2026). [38] Y. Li et al. , R&d-agent-quant: a multi-agent framework for data-centric factors and model joint optimization, arXiv:2505.15155 (2025). [39] S. Schmidgall et al. , Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research assistants, Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguis-tics: EMNLP 2025 , 5977 (2025). [40] F. Villaescusa-Navarro et al. , The denario project: Deep knowledge ai agents for scientific discovery, arXiv:2510.26887 (2025). [41] T. Kwa et al. , Measuring AI ability to complete long tasks, METR Blog, https://metr.org/blog/ 2025-03-19-measuring-ai-ability-to-complete-long-tasks/ 

(2025), accessed: April 11, 2026. [42] R. Raj, H. Wang, and T. Krishna, A cpu-centric perspec-tive on agentic ai, arXiv:2511.00739 (2025).