Title: Compiling Deterministic Structure into SLM Harnesses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17450v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:34:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Compiling Deterministic Structure into SLM Harnesses 

Zan-Kai Chong 

School of Science and Technology Kwansei Gakuin University 

Japan zankai@ieee.org Hiroyuki Ohsaki 

School of Science and Technology Kwansei Gakuin University 

Japan ohsaki@kwansei.ac.jp Bryan Ng 

School of Engineering & Computer Science Victoria University of Wellington 

New Zealand ckbryan@hotmail.com 

Abstract —Enterprise deployment of small language models (SLMs) is constrained by epistemic asymmetry, i.e., small models lack the capacity to self-correct reasoning errors, while frontier LLMs face prohibitive costs and data sovereignty restrictions for high-volume processing. We propose Semantic Gradient Descent (SGDe), a teacher-student optimisation framework that compiles agentic workflows into discrete execution plans comprising direc-ted acyclic graph topologies, system prompts, and deterministic executable code. The trailing e in SGDe distinguishes our discrete, compilation-based framework from stochastic gradient descent. Unlike continuous weight optimisation, SGDe operates in adiscrete semantic space where a frontier teacher agent generates natural language critiques that function as directional gradients to iteratively refine the SLM’s workflow artefacts. We formalise SGDe within a Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning framework, establishing theoretical bounds on sample complexity that enable convergence with as few as three training examples on targeted synthetic tasks by leveraging the teacher as a statistical prior. Empirical evaluation on a challenging GSM-Hard-derived test set constructed via adversarial synthesis demonstrates that compiled workflows achieve 91.3% accuracy at a training sample size of m = 5 , rising to 99.3% at m = 3 within the small-m

regime motivated by Corollary 1, corresponding to a +26.3% to +34.3% absolute improvement over state-of-the-art prompt optimisers. In the terminology of the emerging paradigm of harness engineering, SGDe departs from prior workflow optim-isation frameworks by treating the placement of deterministic executable code, i.e., which subtasks to delegate to a Python runtime and which to retain as LLM calls, as a trace-driven, per-node optimisation target. This generalises the static whole-problem offloading of program-aided approaches such as PAL and PoT. The teacher compiles two complementary deterministic structures into the harness: capability offloading, which delegates subtasks to deterministic Python when the SLM cannot execute them reliably, and structural consensus, which wraps variance-limited reasoning steps in fan-out/fan-in subgraphs aggregated by deterministic voting. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Modern frontier large language models (LLMs) such as GPT-5, Claude, and Gemini exhibit strong generalisation. They can interpret arbitrary documents, reason across domains, and execute complex multi-step tasks with minimal task-specific training. This has fuelled expectations that enterprise artificial intelligence (AI) will likewise act as a general-purpose reason-ing engine, handling diverse real-world inputs with consistent competence. Yet, in practice not all production AI systems are deployed in such use cases. Some enterprise systems are engineered for narrow, well-defined use cases in predictable domains, not for open-ended, uncontrolled scenarios. Organisations therefore use specialised models for specific document types, such as ID cards, bank statements, or insurance claims, rather than generic systems that can reliably interpret arbitrary user uploads [1], [2], [3]. This specialisation reflects an economic constraint and is reminiscent of the advances of expert systems in the 1970s [4]. Although frontier models are broadly capable, their deployment in enterprise environments is often impractical due to prohibitive inference costs, stringent regulatory compliance requirements, and data sovereignty restrictions surrounding sensitive enterprise data. On the other hand, small language models (SLMs) are typ-ically characterised by their heavily reduced parameter counts and optimised for task-specific deployment. They are often preferable to costly advanced LLMs in specialised domains, as the former can achieve comparable performance at a fraction of the computational cost. Realising these gains, however, requires addressing epistemic asymmetry, i.e., when a student agent must both perform a task and judge its own reasoning, it struggles to reliably detect hallucinations and other errors in its own outputs [5], [6]. Additionally, the current distillation techniques, which typically train a smaller student agent to replicate the static outputs or probability distributions of a larger teacher model, generally only focus on transferring knowledge through output mimicking or fine-tuning. These approaches pay little attention to the structural compilation of workflows (i.e., how the orchestration of prompts, tool chains, and control-flow topology shapes execution), which could yield additional performance gains. Recent industry discourse has coalesced around the concept of harness engineering — the discipline of designing the com-plete non-model infrastructure (the “harness”) surrounding an LLM or SLM to make agentic behaviour reliable, observable, and production-ready [7], [8]. In this framing, an agent is simply a combination of model and harness. The present work contributes a formal, PAC-bounded approach to harness engineering: Semantic Gradient Descent (SGDe) automatically compiles and iteratively refines a fully executable harness 

θ = {G , P, C} offline, eliminating epistemic asymmetry while preserving the low inference cost and data-sovereignty ad-

> arXiv:2604.17450v1 [cs.AI] 19 Apr 2026 2

vantages of SLMs. This harness-level formulation generalises program-aided reasoning, which fixes the offload/retain de-cision as a global prompting convention[9], [10], by lifting that decision to a per-node, trace-driven optimisation target. Here G denotes the directed acyclic graph (DAG) topology, 

P the set of specialised system prompts, and C the set of deterministic executable code. Nevertheless, this pipeline lacks a numerical loss function with which to optimise this structural orchestration. Both prompts and the workflow topology are semantic and therefore non-differentiable. To address these limitations, SGDe trans-lates the continuous parameter updates of standard machine learning into a discrete, text-and-code-based architecture for compiled agentic workflows. Our approach is grounded in a strict teacher-student paradigm that consists of a lightweight SLM functioning as a compiled execution engine operating within rigidly defined workflow boundaries, together with a frontier LLM teacher that analyses execution traces, attributes errors, and synthesises optimised workflow artefacts. This decoupling reduces the inference cost and eliminates epistemic asymmetry by ensuring that evaluation and optimisation occur independently of runtime inference. Thereby, it enables the student to maximise performance and minimise cost while the teacher ensures correctness and efficiency. The contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we introduce substrate compilation as a new unit of optimisation for agentic workflows. The teacher selects on a per-node basis among three co-equal compilation actions, i.e., prompt refinement, capability offloading (rewriting a node as determ-inistic code), and structural consensus (wrapping a node in a fan-out/fan-in ensemble with deterministic aggregation) — adaptively in response to per-node failure attribution, directly addressing the capability and reliability gaps that motivate SLM deployment. Second, we derive a resource-bounded PAC analysis in which the effective hypothesis space ΘT is recast as the set of feasible per-subtask compilation choices (code, single LLM call, or fan-out/fan-in consensus), yielding the bound |ΘT | = O  3k in the number of distinct subtask types 

k. This bound is mechanistic rather than merely asymptotic: it explains both why SGDe converges with as few as three training examples on structurally homogeneous tasks and why it degrades predictably when the target domain spans multiple divergent task families. Third, we empirically validate SGDe on a challenging GSM-Hard-derived test set constructed via adversarial synthesis from a single seed question, achieving 91.3% accuracy at a training sample size of m = 5 and 99.3% at m = 3 , corresponding to a +26.3% to +34.3% absolute im-provement over the strongest intra-substrate baseline (DSPy), while requiring only commercially viable training sets. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section II reviews related work in small language models, distillation techniques, and agentic architectures. In Section III we present the SGDe framework, detailing its decoupled teacher-student architecture and the compilation of executable workflow arte-facts. Section IV formalises the approach within a PAC learning framework and derives theoretical sample complexity guarantees. Experimental methodology and results are presen-ted in Section V. Section VI examines topological overfitting and outlines promising directions for future research, including mixture-of-topologies ensembles. Section VII concludes the paper. II. R ELATED WORK 

This section reviews the theoretical foundations of our framework across knowledge distillation, agentic fine-tuning, discrete prompt optimisation, and workflow topologies. We highlight a critical, unresolved gap in the literature: while ex-isting methods effectively optimise continuous model weights or isolated text strings, they lack mechanisms to dynamically optimise the discrete, structural orchestration of compiled agentic workflows. 

A. Teacher-Student Distillation for Small Language Models (SLMs) 

Recent advances have produced a clear bifurcation between massive frontier models and efficient SLMs (sub-billion to ~10 billion parameters) engineered to address prohibitive inference costs, latency, and data governance constraints [1], [11], [3], [2]. To bridge the performance gap, the literature relies heavily on the teacher-student paradigm for knowledge distillation [12]. A highly parameterised teacher generates soft targets or reasoning trajectories; a smaller student is trained to minimise statistical divergence via differentiable losses such as Kullback-Leibler divergence. While effective for transferring static, domain-specific knowledge, this parameter-centric architecture exhibits critical limitations when applied to agentic workflows: it updates continuous weights via numerical loss functions but lacks the mechanisms to optimise the discrete, semantic structures of prompt orchestration or control-flow topologies. It also exacerbates epistemic asymmetry, as SLMs with reduced parameter capacities frequently lack the internal capability to judge their own reasoning trajectories or reliably detect hallucinations [5], [6]. Recent extensions to trajectory-based agentic distillation [13], [14] fine-tune the student on the teacher’s action sequences, but remain dependent on continu-ous parameter updates and consequently mask rather than resolve the asymmetry [15]. 

B. Discrete Prompt Optimisation 

As an alternative to weight updates, recent frameworks treat large language models as discrete optimisers. Approaches such as Optimisation by PROmpting (OPRO) and DSPy formal-ise natural-language instructions as tunable hyperparameters [16], [17]. A powerful LLM evaluates task outputs, generates prompt variations, and iteratively selects those that maximise a predefined metric. These methods successfully translate gradient-based search into discrete semantic space. However, they are fundamentally limited to optimising text alone, assuming the underlying execution architecture (tool chains and operation sequence) is already optimal. In complex enterprise settings, the bottleneck is frequently not the prompt but the structural orchestration of the workflow itself. Current prompt optimisers cannot alter programmatic control flow or adjust structural granularity, leaving architectural failures unresolved. 3

C. Program-Aided Reasoning and the Runtime Boundary 

A complementary line of work predates the workflow-optimisation literature and targets the same capability gap that motivates capability offloading, i.e., the observation that LLMs reliably decompose numerical problems but unreliably execute the arithmetic. PAL [9] and Program-of-Thoughts (PoT) [10] both exploit this observation by prompting the LLM to emit a Python program whose execution, rather than the LLM’s own token generation, produces the final answer, establishing program-aided reasoning as a static, whole-problem prompting pattern applied uniformly at inference time. SGDe lifts this offload decision from a fixed template to a per-node, trace-driven optimisation target; Section III-C presents the detailed comparison. 

D. Agentic Workflow Topologies and Their Semantic Optim-isation Frameworks 

As LLM applications have evolved from linear prompts to multi-step pipelines, graph-based topologies such as AutoGen and Graph of Thoughts have become prevalent [18], [19]. These enable sophisticated decomposition but remain static: the DAG is manually engineered prior to deployment and cannot adapt to the cognitive or context-window limits of the underlying SLM. Recent work has begun to treat these topologies as optim-isable objects. We organise existing approaches along a single axis that we argue is decisive for SLM deployment: the unit of optimisation, i.e., what the framework is permitted to change about the workflow. Prior frameworks fall into two categories, both of which optimise within a fixed model-call substrate; we term these intra-substrate optimisers. The first category optimises textual or prompt-level vari-ables within a fixed computational graph. TextGrad [20] introduced textual gradients that back-propagate through such a graph, while Wang et al. [21] formalised semantic back-propagation by propagating sibling-node context to generate more accurate semantic gradients. APO/ProTeGi [22] and DSPy [17] similarly refine prompts and few-shot demonstra-tions against a fixed pipeline structure. In all of these, every node remains an LLM call before and after optimisation; only the instructions injected at those nodes change. The second category treats the workflow topology itself as mutable. AFlow [23] is the most prominent example, employing Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) over code-represented workflows to discover effective DAG structures. Although AFlow represents workflows as code, the nodes it composes remain model calls: the optimiser rewires how LLM invocations are connected, but does not reassign work away from the LLM. The substrate, the set of computations the LLM is responsible for, is held fixed. SGDe expands the unit of optimisation to the substrate itself. We term this a substrate compiler: at every node v ∈ V ,the teacher may retain v as an LLM call, delegate it to deterministic Python code c ∈ C (capability offloading, Section III-C), or wrap it in a fan-out/fan-in consensus subgraph (structural consensus, Section III-E2). This distinction is load-bearing for SLM deployment specifically: for frontier LLMs, the gap between a prompt and a Python function is narrow and intra-substrate optimisation captures most available gains, but for SLMs the same gap is precisely where deployment fails. Substrate compilation is composable with intra-substrate meth-ods, i.e., AFlow-style search could decide node connectivity while SGDe decides node type; we therefore evaluate SGDe against the strongest intra-substrate baseline (DSPy) to isolate its contribution. III. S EMANTIC GRADIENT DESCENT (SGD E)ARCHITECTURE 

To enable practical on-premise deployment of agentic work-flows, we propose the semantic gradient descent (SGDe) framework, a teacher-student learning approach structured ana-logously to a standard machine learning paradigm. While tradi-tional supervised training relies on differentiable loss functions to update continuous numerical weights, SGDe mirrors this training cycle in a discrete semantic space. In each iteration, an advanced teacher agent acts as an optimiser, systematically refining the discrete workflow artefacts (system prompts, DAG topologies, and executable code) to guide a lightweight student agent toward optimal task execution. 

A. Architecture Components 

The core principle of the proposed framework is the strict separation of execution and optimisation. We implement this through a teacher-student machine learning architecture con-sisting of the following components:  

> •

Tasks: The tasks are assumed to be from the same domain. Under the typical machine learning paradigm, the tasks will be divided into training tasks and the test tasks.  

> •

The Student Agent (Trained Model), denoted as S: A lightweight SLM that serves strictly as a compiled execu-tion engine for the compiled workflow. It operates within the rigid boundaries of the provided instructions and re-mains conceptually blind to the overarching optimisation process.  

> •

The Teacher Agent (Optimiser), denoted as T : A fron-tier, high-capacity LLM tasked exclusively with offline workflow optimisation. The teacher does not execute the daily high-volume tasks. Instead, it observes the student’s execution logs, identifies structural or logical failures, and rewrites the underlying workflow artefacts to permanently resolve errors. 

B. Two Levels of Optimisation: Granularity and Compilation 

SGDe’s optimiser operates at two distinct levels of abstrac-tion. At the granularity level, the teacher reshapes the task partition via node decomposition and node fusion (Section III-E1). These operations do not alter any node’s substrate; they determine the subtask boundaries on which compilation subsequently acts. At the compilation level, once the partition is settled, the teacher selects at each node v ∈ V among three substrate choices: (i) prompt refinement, retaining v as an LLM call under a revised prompt p ∈ P ; (ii) capability 4            

> Figure 1. The capability offloading principle, illustrated on a compound teacher update. A monolithic reasoning node vCoT (left) is first decomposed into a parsing sub-node vparse and an evaluation sub-node veval (a granularity operation on G), after which veval is offloaded from the LLM substrate to deterministic Python in Ct(right; a compilation action). The SLM is restricted to operand extraction; arithmetic is delegated to code, eliminating the epistemic-asymmetry failure mode on numerically intensive tasks.

offloading (Section III-C), re-typing v as a deterministic code node c ∈ C ; and (iii) structural consensus (Section III-E2), replicating v with perturbed prompts and aggregating via a deterministic voting node. The three compilation actions are mutually exclusive at a given node and collectively exhaustive; they address orthogonal failure modes, namely instruction quality, capability gap, and output variance, respectively. Gran-ularity operations are orthogonal to this ternary and may be applied in combination with any compilation action, with the per-node choice driven by the teacher’s semantic gradient gsem 

rather than fixed in advance. This two-level, adaptive, per-node unification distinguishes SGDe from prior work in which each action is applied in isolation or globally. 

C. The Capability Offloading Principle 

The observation that arithmetic and other deterministic sub-computations are better delegated to a Python interpreter than to an LLM’s token generator is not itself new: PAL [9] and PoT [10] established this principle as a static prompting pattern, applied uniformly to every instance at inference time. What distinguishes SGDe is that the offload decision is lifted from a fixed template to a per-node, trace-driven optimisation target. At every node v ∈ V , the teacher evaluates, on the basis of empirical failure attribution over a training set, whether the computation assigned to v is reliably executable by deterministic code, and if so, rewrites v from an LLM call into a code node c ∈ C . We refer to this trace-driven, per-node selection rule as the capability offloading principle to distinguish it from the static, whole-problem offloading pattern of PAL and PoT. Under this view, the execution plan 

θ = {G , P, C} is not merely a workflow but a partition of the task between the probabilistic student and the deterministic runtime, and it is this partition, rather than the prompts or the topology in isolation that SGDe optimises. Figure 1 illustrates the principle on a representative GSM-Hard instance from our experiments. The initial plan θ0 assigns the entire problem to a single chain-of-thought node vCoT ,in which the student agent is expected to parse the natural-language question, extract the relevant quantities, perform the arithmetic, and emit the final answer. On this instance, the 1.5B-parameter student tends to fail at the arithmetic step despite correctly identifying the operands, a signature of the epistemic asymmetry described in Section I. After one SGDe iteration, the teacher’s semantic gradient gsem attributes the failure specifically to the arithmetic sub-step and rewrites 

vCoT into a two-node chain: an LLM extraction node vparse 

(governed by a prompt pparse ∈ P that emits a structured JSON tuple of operands and operator) followed by a deterministic Python node veval ∈ C that consumes the tuple and returns the exact numerical result. The prompt at vparse is narrower and therefore more reliable; the arithmetic is now executed by an interpreter rather than a probabilistic model and is exact by construction. The student’s role at veval has been compiled away entirely. This example illustrates one of the two compilation mechan-isms, i.e., capability offloading and structural consensus that jointly produce the +26.3% ( m = 5 ) to +34.3% ( m = 3 )gains reported in Section V; the second, structural consensus (Section III-E2), is compiled around reasoning steps where the student is capable but high-variance. Both mechanisms are present in the winning harnesses. 

D. The Discrete Parameter Space 

Instead of continuous numerical weights, the student’s oper-ational logic is defined by a discrete execution plan (denoted by θ). Orchestrated via graph-based workflow engines, this plan is fully interpretable and comprises three distinct arte-facts:  

> •

Workflow Topology ( G): A DAG that dictates routing logic, conditional branching, and the sequence of opera-tions.  

> •

System Prompts (P): A set of natural language in-structions injected at specific nodes within the DAG to guide the student’s generation, extraction, or reasoning capabilities.  

> •

Executable Code ( C): A set of deterministic scripts and tool configurations utilised for rigid data manipulation, external API integration, or programmatic formatting (e.g., regular expression-based extraction). 

E. Dynamic Granularity and Structural Refinement 

The semantic gradient gsem directs the teacher agent to perform discrete structural refinement on the execution plan θt

(where t denotes the discrete time epoch where the refinement occurs). Unlike continuous weight updates, this refinement operates via the following complementary mechanisms: gran-ularity adjustment and compiled consensus. 

1) Granularity Adjustment via Cognitive Load Balancing : 

Whereas capability offloading (Section III-C) rewrites a node across the substrate boundary by replacing an LLM call with deterministic code, granularity adjustment operates within the LLM substrate: it resizes the scope of nodes that remain LLM calls, without changing their type. The two mechanisms are complementary and may be applied in combination at the same node. At time epoch t, the teacher analyses execution traces denoted by Tr t to identify cognitive bottlenecks, i.e., specific nodes v where the student agent exhibits reasoning failures 5

attributable to context bloat or lost-in-the-middle attention degradation.  

> •

Node Decomposition: If the semantic gradient fails due to excessive reasoning complexity within a node v ∈ Vt+1 ,the teacher constructs an expanded topology Gt+1 =(Vt+1 , E t+1 ) by decomposing v into a chain of sub-nodes {v1, · · · , v k} ∈ Vt+1 . Each sub-node vi assumes a partition of the original scope such that 

> k

[

> i=1

scope (vi) = scope (v) , (1) where scope (·) denotes semantic domain (sub-task re-sponsibility and input-output coverage). The edge set is updated to Et+1 by redirecting all incoming edges of v

to v1, all outgoing edges of v from vk, and enforcing sequential dependencies v1 → · · · → vk. Each sub-node receives a specialised prompt pi ∈ P t+1 targeting a narrower sub-task.  

> •

Node Fusion: Conversely, if consecutive nodes vi, vi+1 

exhibit redundant inference without accuracy gains, the nodes are merged to minimise latency. This is governed by the heuristic: apply the merge operation fuse (vi, v i+1 ), (2) which collapses the two nodes into one, updates the edge set Et, and synthesises a single specialised prompt, if 

ˆR(θt) − ˆR (θmerge ) < ϵ cost , (3) and the node-level accuracies on the execution trace are statistically indistinguishable, i.e., acc (Tr t, v i) ≈ acc (Tr t, v i+1 ) . (4) Granularity operations sit at a different level of abstraction from the three compilation actions of Section III-B: decom-position and fusion determine the subtask partition, whereas the compilation actions determine how each subtask in that partition is executed. A teacher update may therefore combine a granularity operation with a compilation action at the newly created nodes, as in Figure 1, where vCoT is first decomposed into a parsing sub-node vparse and an evaluation sub-node veval ,and veval is subsequently compiled via capability offloading. 

2) Structural Consensus Patterns (Fan-Out/Fan-In): Cap-ability offloading (Section III-C) removes the student from computations it cannot perform, structural consensus addresses the complementary case, in which the student is capable but unreliable and output variance, rather than capability, is the dominant source of error. To mitigate epistemic asymmetry without invoking the frontier teacher at runtime, the teacher compiles deterministic ensemble topologies into G. When gsem over the ensemble 

G exhibits high variance in a specific reasoning step (e.g., arithmetic verification), the teacher constructs a fan-out/fan-in subgraph, for example, the consensus graph like 

Gcons = ( {vin } ∪ { v1, v 2, v 3} ∪ { vvote },

{(vin , v i), (vi, v vote )}3

> i=1

 . (5)         

> Figure 2. Structural consensus via fan-out/fan-in compilation. A single prob-abilistic reasoning node v(left) is replicated by the teacher into three parallel LLM instances with prompt perturbations {π1, π 2, π 3}and aggregated by a deterministic voting node vvote ∈ C t(right). Unlike capability offloading (Figure 1), the student’s probabilistic inference is retained and replicated rather than replaced; the deterministic structure is confined to the aggregation step.

Figure 2 illustrates this transformation. A single probabilistic reasoning node (left) is replicated into three parallel LLM instances (right), each governed by a perturbed prompt, and their outputs are aggregated by a deterministic voting node 

vvote . At epoch t, 

> •

v1, v2, and v3 are parallel instances of the same reas-oning operation with associated prompt perturbations 

{p + π1, p + π2, p + π3} ⊂ P t+1  

> •

vvote executes a deterministic aggregation (e.g., majority voting, mode extraction) implemented in Ct+1 .This compiled self-consistency reduces variance at the cost of increased parallelism, trading inference throughput for accuracy. The teacher applies this pattern selectively, restricted to nodes where the expected reduction in empirical risk ∆ ˆR

exceeds the marginal computational cost. 

3) Heuristic Update Synthesis: The complete update rule combines these elements. The teacher agent Toptimiser gener-ates a candidate plan θt+1 by conditioning on the master prompt Φ, the semantic gradient gsem , and the current plan 

θt, and emitting a structurally valid successor, i.e., θt+1 =

Toptimiser (Φ , g sem , θ t) subject to valid (θt+1 ), where valid (·) en-forces syntactic correctness (acyclicity of G, type consistency in C). This discrete, teacher-induced transition replaces the continuous parameter update θ ← θ−η∇ ˆR found in stochastic gradient descent (SGD), from which SGDe is deliberately distinguished: rather than moving along a gradient direction in a metric space, the optimiser samples a single successor from the teacher’s induced distribution over valid plans and accepts it by greedy hill-climbing (Section IV-C3). 

F. Iterative Optimisation Lifecycle 

The framework operates in a continuous lifecycle of ex-ecution, evaluation, and semantic updating to minimise the empirical risk ( ˆR) over a training set of tasks, formalised in Algorithm 1. 

1) Phase 1: Constrained Execution (The Forward Pass): 

The lifecycle begins by deploying the student agent to process the training set. As the student traverses the DAG, the or-chestrator generates a comprehensive execution trace logging 6

all inputs, intermediate reasoning steps, tool outputs, and the final response. The system then calculates an empirical risk score, which functions as the semantic loss function of the architecture, evaluating both task accuracy and inference efficiency. 

2) Phase 2: Semantic Error Attribution (The Backward Pass): If the empirical risk exceeds an acceptable threshold, the teacher agent initiates the optimisation phase. Because the workflow artefacts are discrete, standard mathematical gradient calculation is undefined. Instead, the teacher analyses the execution trace to perform semantic error attribution, generating a natural language critique ( gsem ) that isolates the exact locus of failure. 

3) Phase 3: Dynamic Granularity Adjustment: A key fea-ture of the teacher’s heuristic update is adjusting the structural granularity of the workflow topology ( G). If the teacher’s critique identifies that the student SLM failed due to context bloat or lost-in-the-middle attention degradation, the teacher dynamically increases the granularity. It decomposes a single, complex reasoning node into multiple, smaller sequential nodes (see Section III-E1). Conversely, if redundant nodes inflate inference costs without improving accuracy, the teacher merges them. This dynamic granularity ensures the workflow is calibrated to the specific cognitive limits of the chosen student SLM. Note that the teacher generates a candidate plan ˜θ. If 

ˆR

˜θ



< ˆRcurrent , the algorithm accepts the update, otherwise it retains the existing best candidate plan, θbest .

Algorithm 1 Semantic gradient descent (SGDe) for agentic workflows. The teacher iteratively critiques execution traces and rewrites the execution plan θ = {G , P, C} , accepting candidates via greedy hill-climbing, until the empirical risk falls below ϵ or the epoch budget T is reached. 

Require: Student agent S; Teacher agent T =(Tcritic , Toptimiser ); Training sample Z = {(τi, y ∗ 

> i

)}mi=1 ∼D; Initial Execution Plan θ0 = {G 0, P0, C0}; Master Prompt Φ; Acceptable error ϵ; Max epochs T

Ensure: Optimised Execution Plan θopt  

> 1:

Initialise: θbest ← θ0 

> 2:

for epoch t = 0 , 1, . . . , T do  

> 3:

▷ Forward Pass: Constrained Execution  

> 4:

Execute Student on Z: ˆyt, Tr t ← S (Z; θbest ) 

> 5:

Calculate Risk: ˆRcurrent ← 1

> m

Pmi=1 L(ˆ yt,i , y ∗ 

> i

, Tr t,i ) 

> 6:

if ˆRcurrent ≤ ϵ then  

> 7:

return θopt ← θbest  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

▷ Backward Pass: Semantic Error Attribution  

> 10:

Generate Critique: gsem ← T critic (Φ , Tr t, ˆRcurrent ) 

> 11:

▷ Greedy Candidate Generation  

> 12:

Generate Candidate: ˜θ ← T optimiser (Φ , g sem , θ best ) 

> 13:

Execute Student on Z with ˜θ to estimate ˆR(˜θ) 

> 14:

if ˆR(˜θ) < ˆRcurrent then  

> 15:

θbest ← ˜θ ▷ Keep the improved DAG  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

return “Optimisation Failed to Converge” IV. M ATHEMATICAL MODEL 

The standard machine learning process optimises the model parameters over a continuous space of numerical weights. On the other hand, our proposed framework optimises the compiled agentic workflows that operate over a discrete space of structural and semantic artefacts. To formalise this, we elaborate the mathematical model in this section. 

A. Model Parameterisation 

Our SGDe framework mirrors the standard machine learning paradigm, with a discrete parameter space distributed between the executable artefacts deployed by the student agent (acting as the trained model) and the contextual directives utilised by the teacher agent (acting as the optimiser). The execution plan at discrete training iteration t, denoted θt, is the tuple 

θt = {G t, Pt, Ct} , (6) where Gt = (V, E ) is the directed acyclic graph (DAG) defining the topology, Pt is the set of system prompts injected at specific nodes v ∈ V , and Ct represents the set of callable tool functions, implemented as deterministic Python scripts or API endpoints. The teacher agent T is additionally guided by a master prompt Φ that establishes the immutable optimisation directives and structural constraints governing its behaviour. 

B. Forward Pass and Empirical Risk 

To satisfy PAC learning requirements, optimisation is not performed on a single task instance, but rather over a batch of tasks. Let D be the real-world joint distribution of tasks and their ground-truth answers within the target domain. We draw a finite training set of m paired samples, Z =

{(τ1, y ∗ 

> 1

) , · · · , (τm, y ∗

> m

)} ∼ D .During the forward pass, the student agent executes the training set Z, completely constrained by the execution plan 

θt. For each task τi, the student at epoch t emits a prediction 

ˆyt,i = S (τi; θt) along with an execution trace Tr t,i that logs all intermediate reasoning steps, tool outputs, and final responses. We define a composite semantic loss function L (ˆ y, y ∗, Tr )

that evaluates the execution based on both task accuracy (by comparing ˆy against y∗) and workflow inference cost (derived from Tr). In standard machine learning, the ultimate goal is to minim-ise the true generalisation error R (θt), which is the expected loss over the entire task distribution. However, because the true distribution is unknown, we calculate the empirical risk 

ˆR (θt), representing the average loss over our finite training set. This formulation is defined as: 

R (θt) = E(τ,y ∗)∼D [L (S (τ ; θt) , y ∗, Tr (τ ; θt))] , (7) and 

ˆR (θt) = 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

L (S (τi; θt) , y ∗ 

> i

, Tr t,i ) . (8) This empirical risk score ˆR (θt) serves as the objective metric. If it exceeds an acceptable error threshold, it triggers the backward pass, prompting the teacher agent to evaluate the execution traces and formulate a semantic update. 7

C. Semantic Error Attribution (The Backward Pass) 

Because the parameter space of the execution plan θt is en-tirely discrete, calculating a standard numerical gradient ∇θ ˆR

is mathematically undefined. To overcome this, our framework replaces the continuous backpropagation with an LLM-driven heuristic update aimed at minimising the empirical risk ˆR (θt).We therefore introduce a two-role teacher: the critic Tcritic 

produces the semantic gradient gsem (a natural-language cri-tique that functions as a discrete directional signal), while the separate optimiser Toptimiser consumes this signal and emits a candidate successor plan via θt+1 = Toptimiser (Φ , g sem , θ t).This decomposition mirrors the classical two-stage structure of gradient-based optimisation, namely (i) compute a directional signal, followed by (ii) use it to propose a feasible update; the analogy is structural rather than metric: no norm on execution plans is defined, and the optimiser’s output is a discrete candidate rather than the metric projection of a continuous step. Convergence relies on greedy acceptance against ˆR

(Algorithm 1), not on any contraction property of a projection operator. 

1) Fault Localisation (Semantic Gradient Formulation): 

When the empirical risk exceeds the acceptable threshold, the teacher agent initiates the backward pass by evaluating the execution traces (Tr t) of the training set. Acting as a diagnostic critic, it performs semantic error attribution to generate a natural language critique gsem . This critique, which is the semantic gradient, functions as a discrete directional gradient, isolating the exact locus of failure, such as identifying a specific node v ∈ V within the workflow topology Gt that is causing systemic data extraction errors. The semantic gradient is formulated as: 

gsem = Tcritic 



Φ, Tr t, ˆR (θt)



. (9) 

2) Candidate Generation (The Optimiser Step): Once the semantic gradient is formulated, the teacher transitions into its optimiser role and synthesises a candidate plan for the next iteration. We deliberately describe this as candidate generation rather than projection: the optimiser does not minimise a distance to gsem over ΘL under any defined metric; it samples a single plausible successor conditioned on the critique. Accept-ance is handled separately by the hill-climbing rule of Section IV-C3. The candidate plan is given by 

θt+1 = Toptimiser (Φ , g sem , θ t) . (10) 

3) Greedy Hill-Climbing and Extension to Tabu Con-straints: A critical vulnerability in LLM-driven autonomous optimisation is the propensity for infinite loops, wherein the agent continuously cycles through previously evaluated failure states. Our current implementation employs greedy hill-climbing: the system maintains only the best-performing execution plan θbest and accepts a candidate ˜θ only if ˆR(˜θ) <

ˆR(θbest ).Empirically, the teacher’s strong prior P (θ) ensures rapid convergence without revisiting failed configurations. Formally, however, greedy selection lacks guarantees against cyclic oscillation. The framework readily extends to Tabu-constrained search by maintaining a history buffer Ht of previously evaluated plans. By injecting the master prompt Φ with explicit instructions to never generate an execution plan identical to any configuration stored in Ht, we enforce the probabilistic constraint Pr ( θt+1 ∈ H t) ≈ 0. This would provide bounds against cycling when optimising with weaker teacher models or noisier semantic gradients. We note that the absence of a projection operator in the formal sense is not a gap in the analysis. The convergence argument of the following subsection rests on three properties: finiteness of the bounded hypothesis space ΘL, monotone greedy acceptance of candidate plans, and the teacher’s prior concentration on the realisable subspace ΘT . None of these requires a metric on execution plans, so no projection operator need be defined for the bound to hold. 

D. Theoretical Guarantees: Resource-Bounded PAC Learning 

Because the space of all possible Python scripts and prompts is infinite, we establish theoretical convergence guarantees by modelling the teacher’s optimisation loop within a bounded PAC learning framework. 

1) Assumption 1 - Bounded Turing Computability and Real-isability: We assume the target objective is Turing-computable and can be expressed by an optimal execution plan θ∗ within a maximum description length Lmax . This length is measured in context tokens and maximum DAG depth, which effectively restricts our search space to a finite hypothesis class ΘL.Furthermore, we assume realisability, i.e., there exists at least one θ∗ ∈ ΘL such that the empirical risk ˆR over the training set evaluates to zero, denoted as ˆR (θ∗) = 0 .Concretely, we take ΘL to be the set of valid execution plans 

θ = {G , P, C} of bounded description length, where each node 

v ∈ V is labelled either as an LLM call (governed by some prompt p ∈ P ) or as a deterministic code call (governed by some script c ∈ C ). Each θ ∈ ΘL therefore induces a partition of the task into sub-computations assigned to the probabilistic student or to the deterministic runtime, and ΘL is the space of all such bounded partitions together with their connecting topology. The topology G may additionally contain fan-out/fan-in consensus subgraphs (Section III-E2), in which multiple LLM nodes redundantly execute the same sub-computation before a deterministic voting node aggregates their outputs. Such subgraphs are expressed through G together with the two node labels above and do not introduce additional node types, so 

ΘL remains the same space of bounded execution plans. 

2) Lemma 1 - Occam’s Razor Bound for Finite Hypothesis Classes: We restate the classical realisable-case Occam bound [24], [25] for reference, as it underpins the sample-complexity analysis that follows. Under Assumption IV-D1, the probabil-ity of the teacher finding a plan that perfectly fits the training set but fails in production ( R (θ) > ϵ ) is strictly bounded. To ensure with confidence 1 − δ that the optimised plan has a true generalisation error R (θ) ≤ ϵ, the required sample size 

m satisfies 

m ≥ 1

ϵ



ln |ΘL| + ln 

 1

δ

 

. (11) This bound is standard; its utility for our framework depends entirely on obtaining a tight characterisation of the effective 8

hypothesis space |ΘL|. Corollary IV-D3 establishes such a characterisation under the capability offloading principle. 

3) Corollary 1 - The LLM Prior as an Offloading Feasibility Map: The contribution of this subsection is a mechanistic characterisation of the effective hypothesis space ΘT searched by the teacher under the capability offloading principle, which when substituted into Lemma IV-D2 yields the sample-complexity bound observed empirically in Section V-C. Although |ΘL| is astronomically large due to the combinat-orial space of executable code and natural-language prompts, the frontier teacher T does not search ΘL uniformly. Under the capability offloading principle (Section III-C), the teacher’s pre-training knowledge functions specifically as a learned map from subtask descriptions to offloading feasibility: for each candidate node v, the teacher estimates whether v is reliably executable by deterministic code and selects the partition accordingly. This reframes the effective hypothesis space ΘT not as an arbitrary subset of ΘL, but as the set of feasible partitions of the task graph, i.e., those in which every node assigned to the deterministic runtime is in fact code-executable, and every node assigned to the student is within its capability envelope. The cardinality of ΘT is therefore not bounded by the size of the prompt or code space, but by the number of distinct subtask types present in the target task family. Formally, if a task domain admits k distinct subtask types (e.g., for GSM-Hard-style problems: operand extraction, arithmetic evaluation, unit conversion, final formatting), then |ΘT | = O  3k rather than O(|prompt space | × | code space | × | topology space |), since the teacher’s compilation decision at each subtask type is essentially ternary: delegate to the deterministic runtime, retain as a single LLM call, or wrap in a fan-out/fan-in consensus subgraph. Here k denotes the number of distinct subtask types in the partition induced by the granularity operations of Section III-E1; granularity operations reshape this partition but do not enlarge the per-subtask choice set, so the bound 

|ΘT | = O  3k is unchanged by their inclusion. Substituting into Lemma 1, the sample complexity becomes 

m ≥ 1

ϵ



k · ln 3 + ln 

 1

δ

 

, (12) which is linear in the number of subtask types and independent of the raw size of the prompt or code spaces. For a structurally homogeneous task family such as the GSM-Hard-derived test set used in Section V, k is small (on the order of three to five). The substantive content of the bound is therefore that sample complexity is linear in k rather than logarithmic in the raw prompt or code spaces; the bound is a sufficient condition, not a tight prediction. At standard tolerances ( ϵ = 0 .1, δ = 0 .1)it evaluates to m ≳ O(10 k), so the empirical convergence observed at m = 3 is faster than the worst-case guarantee. We attribute this gap to the teacher’s prior concentration on ΘT ,with which the observed m = 3 behaviour is consistent rather than formally predicted. V. E XPERIMENT EVALUATION 

To empirically validate the SGDe framework, we designed a series of experiments to test both task accuracy and structural convergence. The primary objective is to demonstrate that optimising the discrete compiled workflow ( θ) enables an SLM to achieve frontier-level performance at a fraction of the inference cost. 

A. Experimental Setup 

We implemented the agentic workflows utilising a graph-based orchestration framework, which allows for the pro-grammatic manipulation of the DAG topologies ( G), system prompts ( P), and executable Python tools ( C). The necessary components in the experiments are, 

1) Models: For the student agent (the execution engine), we deployed Qwen-2.5-1.5B, a lightweight, dense language model developed by Alibaba Cloud. With a parameter count of 1.5 billion, this model is heavily optimised for fast infer-ence on edge devices and resource-constrained environments without requiring extensive GPU compute. Despite its min-imal footprint, the Qwen-2.5 architecture demonstrates robust instruction-following and deterministic execution capabilities. We deployed a heavily quantised version of this model to accurately simulate on-premise enterprise deployment, where strict data governance and the minimisation of operational costs are critical. For the teacher agent (the meta-reasoning engine), we utilised Kimi 2.5, a high-capacity frontier model developed by Moonshot AI. Kimi is characterised by its native long-context processing capabilities and advanced logical reasoning. We accessed this model strictly via API during the offline optimisation phase. Its advanced semantic evaluation capab-ilities are essential for the teacher role, as the model must ingest lengthy, multi-step execution traces, accurately isolate epistemic failures, and reliably generate syntactically valid JSON workflow topologies while the optimisation employs greedy hill-climbing to maintain only the best-performing workflow (Section IV-C3). Each configuration reported in Figures 3, 4, and 5 was evaluated over n = 3 independent runs with different random seeds; error bars show minimum, maximum, and mean ±

standard deviation across these runs. 

2) Datasets: While enterprise workflows encompass di-verse tasks (document extraction, OCR, etc.), we select GSM-Hard as a representative structured reasoning task that mirrors the deterministic calculation requirements of financial docu-ment processing and compliance verification, while allowing unambiguous evaluation of the compilation framework. To rigorously test the optimisation frameworks against the student agent’s inherent cognitive limitations, we applied a targeted filtering and synthesis pipeline:  

> •

Baseline Isolation: We first evaluated the unoptimised student agent across the GSM-Hard dataset to identify and isolate the specific questions it failed to answer correctly in a zero-shot setting.  

> •

Adversarial Synthesis: From this subset of failed tasks, we randomly selected a seed question. We then employed the high-capacity teacher agent to systematically generate a synthesised dataset of structurally and mathematically 9

similar questions, effectively creating a targeted bench-mark of tasks known to exceed the student agent’s baseline capabilities.  

> •

Partitioning and Evaluation: This synthesised dataset was partitioned into mutually exclusive training and holdout test sets. The training data was utilised strictly for the iterative optimisation phases of both the DSPy baseline and the proposed SGDe framework. Final model perform-ance and generalisation accuracy for all experiments were measured exclusively against the unseen test dataset. 

B. Experiment 1: Architectural Superiority 

The first experiment evaluates the performance of dynamic topological optimisation against static prompt optimisation baselines. We compared the baseline zero-shot student agent, a state-of-the-art prompt optimiser (DSPy), and our proposed SGDe framework. Accuracy was measured as the exact match of the final numerical output over the test data. Unless otherwise noted, Experiment 1 uses a training sample size of m = 5 ; the complete sample-complexity sweep across 

m ∈ { 3, 5, 10 } is reported in Section V-C. The m = 5 figure is presented here as a stable mid-range operating point, while Section V-C shows that the small-m regime motivated by Corollary 1 yields a higher mean accuracy at m = 3 with comparable or lower variance. The results, illustrated in Figure 3, demonstrate a significant performance bottleneck in static architectures. The baseline student agent achieved a mean accuracy of μ = 48 .3% (Range: 

36 .7% − 60 .0% ). Applying DSPy to optimise the prompts and few-shot examples within a static CoT pipeline improved the mean accuracy to μ = 65 .0% . However, DSPy’s performance hit a ceiling, constrained by the SLM’s inherent limitations in executing complex arithmetic natively. In contrast, the SGDe framework achieved a mean accuracy of μ = 91 .3% at m = 5 (Range: 80 .0% − 100 .0% ), yielding a +26 .3% absolute improvement over DSPy. At m = 3,within the small-m regime motivated by Corollary 1, SGDe achieves μ = 99 .3% (Section V-C, Figure 4), corresponding to a +34 .3% absolute improvement; we report the m = 5 

figure as the headline to reflect a stable mid-range operating point, while noting that the framework’s best configuration in our sweep exceeds it by 8 percentage points. By allowing the teacher agent to dynamically rewrite the DAG and inject deterministic Python code nodes ( Ct), the SGDe framework successfully offloaded the mathematical computation from the probabilistic SLM, effectively neutralising the epistemic asymmetry that causes standard agentic workflows to fail. The compiled harnesses further wrapped variance-sensitive reasoning steps in fan-out/fan-in consensus subgraphs (Sec-tion III-E2), combining capability offloading with structural consensus. This empirical pattern directly validates the compilation ternary introduced in Section III-B: across all winning har-nesses, arithmetic and parsing steps were offloaded to de-terministic Python nodes, while the remaining probabilistic reasoning steps were wrapped in fan-out/fan-in consensus sub-graphs. The teacher never produced a winning configuration           

> Figure 3. Accuracy comparison on the challenging GSM-Hard derived test set at m= 5 (see Section V-A2 for details; m= 3 results appear in Figure 4). The dynamic workflow topology of the SGDe framework ( μ= 91 .3% )significantly outperforms the static architectures of both the DSPy prompt optimiser ( μ= 65 .0% ) and the baseline student agent ( μ= 48 .3% ).

that applied any single mechanism in isolation. This confirms that capability offloading and structural consensus address distinct, non-overlapping failure modes in SLM execution, and that an optimiser restricted to either mechanism alone cannot recover the full performance gain. 

C. Experiment 2: Sample Complexity and PAC Learning Bounds 

The second experiment investigates the sample complexity required to optimise the compiled workflow, directly testing the resource-bounded PAC learning guarantees established in Corollary IV-D3. We evaluated the SGDe framework’s test accuracy across varying training sample sizes ( m = 3 , m = 5 ,and m = 10 ). The m = 3 configuration lies within the small-m regime motivated by Corollary IV-D3 for structurally homogeneous task families with k ≈ 3 to 5 subtask types. Corollary 1 is a sufficient condition rather than a prediction: substituting k = 3 

to 5 at ϵ = 0 .1, δ = 0 .1 yields m ≳ O(10 k), so the empirical convergence at m = 3 is faster than the worst-case bound. This is consistent with, rather than predicted by, the teacher’s prior concentration on ΘT . The sweep across m ∈ { 3, 5, 10 }

establishes that accuracy remains high across the full small-sample regime rather than only at m = 3 .As depicted in Figure 4, the SGDe framework demon-strates exceptional data efficiency. The framework achieved its highest mean test accuracy of μ = 99 .3% using a training sample size of only m = 3 . When the sample size increased to m = 5 , we observed a slight dip in mean accuracy ( μ =91 .3% ) and an increase in variance. This non-monotonicity is a characteristic behaviour of heuristic optimisation over highly constrained, discrete search spaces: batch composition matters more than batch size in the small-sample regime, and the specific execution traces selected for m = 5 introduced a failure mode that the m = 3 and m = 10 batches did not exhibit. This is consistent with Corollary IV-D3, under which 10  

> Figure 4. Impact of training sample size on test accuracy. The SGDe framework demonstrates high data efficiency, peaking at a mean accuracy of 99.3% with only 3 training samples, empirically validating the proposed PAC learning bounds for discrete workflow optimisation.

sample efficiency depends on the teacher’s prior concentration on ΘT rather than on batch size monotonically. However, the performance quickly stabilises at μ = 95 .0% 

when the sample size reaches m = 10 . Crucially, even at the lowest recorded variance point of the m = 5 batch ( 80 .0% ), the SGDe framework still significantly outperformed the max-imum accuracy achieved by the DSPy baseline ( 73 .3% ). These results empirically validate Corollary 1 (Section IV-D3): by utilising the teacher agent as a highly optimised statistical prior, SGDe effectively concentrates the search on a reduced subspace, achieving robust generalisation with an exception-ally small, commercially viable training set. VI. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 

A. Boundary Conditions: Task Homogeneity and Topological Overfitting 

While SGDe demonstrates exceptional sample efficiency for narrowly scoped tasks, we now empirically validate the boundary conditions of Assumption IV-D1 by testing the realisability assumption under structural heterogeneity. Recall that our PAC bounds assume the existence of an optimal execution plan θ∗ within a coherent hypothesis space ΘT

on which the teacher’s prior concentrates. When the training batch mixes questions synthesised from two distinct seed questions representing highly divergent structural problem spaces (denoted as Q1 and Q2), this assumption is violated: no single DAG topology can simultaneously realise minimum empirical risk for both domains. As illustrated in Figure 5, evaluating on this mixed-task test set reveals topological overfitting as a boundary condition rather than a performance failure. The zero-shot baseline student agent achieves a mean accuracy of μ = 45 .3% . In this setting, DSPy attains μ = 47 .3% (max 70.0%, min 33.3%), whilst the SGDe-optimised workflow reaches μ = 48 .7% 

(max 56.7%, min 40.0%). Although SGDe remains marginally superior to both the unoptimised baseline and the DSPy prompt optimiser, the modest overall gains and the variance observed confirm our theoretical prediction: when forced to    

> Figure 5. Validation of boundary conditions: Performance on a mixed-task test set ( Q1vs Q2) demonstrates topological interference when the realisability assumption is violated. The modest gains confirm that PAC learning guarantees and the minimal sample efficiency observed with as few as three examples apply specifically to structurally homogeneous domains, validating the design guideline for aggressive compartmentalisation.

reconcile conflicting semantic critiques within a single DAG, the teacher agent produces structural improvements tailored to 

Q1 that subtly degrade performance on Q2.This result empirically validates the design guideline pro-posed in Section III: SGDe-optimised workflows must be aggressively compartmentalised into narrow, domain-specific subgraphs rather than attempting to create a single gener-alist DAG that spans widely divergent task structures. The interference observed in Figure 5 is not a practical limitation of the method, but rather the expected cost of violating the narrow-domain assumption stated in Section I. Consequently, the convergence with as few as three examples demonstrated in Section V-C applies strictly to independent, specialised harnesses optimised for structurally homogeneous task distri-butions. The PAC guarantees of Corollary 1 hold specifically when the teacher’s prior concentrates on a coherent subspace 

ΘT . Mixing domains will fragment this subspace and prevent efficient compilation. 

B. Future Work: Agentic Routing and Topological Ensembles 

To resolve the mild multi-task interference observed in Fig-ure 5, we suggest exploring the integration of a deterministic routing layer at the apex of the execution architecture. Rather than forcing the teacher agent to compile a single, generalist DAG that suffers from topological overfitting, we propose extending the framework to support a mixture-of-topologies. In practical deployments utilising graph-based orchestrators, this approach manifests as an initial intent-classification node. This lightweight classifier evaluates the semantic structure of the incoming task and conditionally routes the execution trace to a specialised, pre-compiled SGDe subgraph (e.g., routing compound-interest queries exclusively to subgraph A, and payment-reconciliation tasks to subgraph B). By compartmentalising the hypothesis space, the teacher agent can independently optimise each subgraph without triggering conflicting semantic critiques (gsem ). We hypothesise that this topological-ensemble architecture will allow the system 11 

to handle a diverse array of generalised enterprise requests while strictly preserving the near-perfect accuracy, minimised inference costs, and tight PAC learning bounds inherent to specialised SGDe compilation. Interested readers may refer to [26], [27], [28], [29] for related work on routing and mixture-of-experts architectures. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced Semantic Gradient Descent (SGDe), ateacher-student framework that compiles the agent harness θ =

{G , P, C} offline by translating the continuous optimisation loop of machine learning into discrete refinement of workflow artefacts. Its principal contribution is to make the boundary between the model and the runtime itself optimisable: at each node, the teacher selects adaptively among prompt refinement, capability offloading, and structural consensus (Section III-B), so the execution plan becomes a partition of the task between the probabilistic student and the deterministic runtime. This reframing gives the PAC analysis mechanistic teeth. Corollary 1 bounds the effective hypothesis space |ΘT | by O  3k, explaining both convergence from as few as three training examples on structurally homogeneous tasks and the predictable degradation observed on the mixed-task boundary condition of Section VI-A. Empirically, SGDe reaches 91.3% mean accuracy on the GSM-Hard-derived test set at m = 5 

and 99.3% at m = 3 , within the small-m regime motivated by Corollary 1, a +26.3% to +34.3% absolute improvement over the strongest intra-substrate baseline (DSPy), with every win-ning harness combining offloaded code nodes and consensus subgraphs. By making the SLM/runtime boundary a first-class optim-isation target under PAC guarantees, SGDe offers a practical pathway toward certifiable, on-premise agentic systems. Ex-tension to heterogeneous enterprise workflows via the mixture-of-topologies architecture outlined in Section VI-B remains future work. REFERENCES [1] C. Ling, X. Zhao, J. Lu, C. Deng, C. Zheng, J. Wang, T. Chowdhury, Y. Li, H. Cui, X. Zhang, T. Zhao, A. Panalkar, D. Mehta, S. Pasquali, W. Cheng, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, H. Chen, C. White, Q. Gu, J. Pei, C. Yang, and L. Zhao, “Domain specialization as the key to make large language models disruptive: A comprehensive survey,” 2024. [2] H. V. Khurdula, V. Agarwal, and Y. D. Khemlani, “Interfaze: The future of AI is built on task-specific small models,” 2026. [3] Z. Lu, X. Li, D. Cai, R. Yi, F. Liu, X. Zhang, N. D. Lane, and M. Xu, “Small language models: Survey, measurements, and insights,” 2025. [4] D. C. Brock and B. Grad, “Expert systems: Commercializing artificial intelligence,” IEEE Annals of the History of Computing , vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 5–7, 2022. [5] Y. Zhang, M. Khalifa, L. Logeswaran, J. Kim, M. Lee, H. Lee, and L. Wang, “Small language models need strong verifiers to self-correct reasoning,” 2024. [6] J. Huang, X. Chen, S. Mishra, H. S. Zheng, A. W. Yu, X. Song, and D. Zhou, “Large language models cannot self-correct reasoning yet,” 2024. [7] R. Lopopolo, “Harness engineering: Leveraging Codex in an agent-first world.” OpenAI Blog, Feb. 2026. Accessed: April 12, 2026. [8] V. Trivedy, “The anatomy of an agent harness.” LangChain Blog, Mar. 2026. Accessed: April 12, 2026. [9] L. Gao, A. Madaan, S. Zhou, U. Alon, P. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Callan, and G. Neubig, “PAL: Program-aided language models,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 202 of 

PMLR , pp. 10764–10799, 2023. [10] W. Chen, X. Ma, X. Wang, and W. W. Cohen, “Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [11] F. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, Z. Wu, T. Mo, Q. Lu, W. Wang, R. Li, J. Xu, X. Tang, Q. He, Y. Ma, M. Huang, and S. Wang, “A comprehensive survey of small language models in the era of large language models: Techniques, enhancements, applications, collaboration with LLMs, and trustworthiness,” 2024. [12] M. Ballout, U. Krumnack, G. Heidemann, and K.-U. Kühnberger, “Efficient knowledge distillation: Empowering small language models with teacher model insights,” 2024. [13] A. Zeng, M. Liu, R. Lu, B. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Dong, and J. Tang, “AgentTuning: Enabling generalized agent abilities for LLMs,” 2023. [14] B. Chen, C. Shu, E. Shareghi, N. Collier, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “FireAct: Toward language agent fine-tuning,” 2023. [15] X. Liu, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Lei, H. Lai, Y. Gu, H. Ding, K. Men, K. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Deng, A. Zeng, Z. Du, C. Zhang, S. Shen, T. Zhang, Y. Su, H. Sun, M. Huang, Y. Dong, and J. Tang, “AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents,” 2025. [16] C. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Lu, H. Liu, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, and X. Chen, “Large language models as optimizers,” 2024. [17] O. Khattab, A. Singhvi, P. Maheshwari, Z. Zhang, K. Santhanam, S. Vardhamanan, S. Haq, A. Sharma, T. T. Joshi, H. Moazam, H. Miller, M. Zaharia, and C. Potts, “DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines,” 2023. [18] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, M. Podstawski, L. Gianinazzi, J. Gajda, T. Lehmann, H. Niewiadomski, P. Nyczyk, and T. Hoefler, “Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 38, p. 17682–17690, Mar. 2024. [19] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation,” 2023. [20] M. Yuksekgonul, F. Bianchi, J. Boen, S. Liu, Z. Huang, C. Guestrin, and J. Zou, “TextGrad: Automatic "differentiation" via text,” 2024. [21] W. Wang, H. A. Alyahya, D. R. Ashley, O. Serikov, D. Khizbullin, F. Faccio, and J. Schmidhuber, “How to correctly do semantic back-propagation on language-based agentic systems,” 2024. [22] R. Pryzant, D. Iter, J. Li, Y. T. Lee, C. Zhu, and M. Zeng, “Automatic prompt optimization with "gradient descent" and beam search,” 2023. [23] J. Zhang, J. Xiang, Z. Yu, F. Teng, X. Chen, J. Chen, M. Zhuge, X. Cheng, S. Hong, J. Wang, B. Zheng, B. Liu, Y. Luo, and C. Wu, “AFlow: Automating agentic workflow generation,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [24] A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmuth, “Occam’s razor,” Information Processing Letters , vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 377–380, 1987. [25] S. Shalev-Shwartz and S. Ben-David, Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to Algorithms . Cambridge University Press, 2014. [26] I. Ong, A. Almahairi, V. Wu, W.-L. Chiang, T. Wu, J. E. Gonzalez, M. W. Kadous, and I. Stoica, “RouteLLM: Learning to route LLMs with preference data,” 2025. [27] J. Tang, T. Fan, and C. Huang, “AutoAgent: A fully-automated and zero-code framework for LLM agents,” 2025. [28] J. Su, Q. Lan, Y. Xia, L. Sun, W. Tian, T. Shi, X. Song, L. He, and Y. Jingsong, “Difficulty-aware agentic orchestration for query-specific multi-agent workflows,” 2026. [29] J. Wang, J. Wang, B. Athiwaratkun, C. Zhang, and J. Zou, “Mixture-of-agents enhances large language model capabilities,” 2024.