Title: Learning to Evolve: A Self-Improving Framework for Multi-Agent Systems via Textual Parameter Graph Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20714v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 01:18:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Learning to Evolve: A Self-Improving Framework for Multi-Agent Systems via Textual Parameter Graph Optimization 

Shan He ∗ Runze Wang ∗ Zhuoyun Du Huiyu Bai Zouying Cao Yu Cheng Bo Zheng †

Future Living Lab of Alibaba 

{shanhe.hs, yunze.wrz}@alibaba-inc.com 

Abstract 

Designing and Optimizing multi-agent systems (MAS) is a complex, labor-intensive process of "Agent Engineering." Existing automatic optimization methods, primarily focused on 

flat prompt tuning , lack the structural aware-ness to debug the intricate web of interactions in MAS. More critically, these optimizers are 

static ; they do not learn from experience to im-prove their own optimization strategies. To ad-dress these gaps, we introduce Textual Param-eter Graph Optimization (TPGO) , a frame-work that enables a multi-agent system to learn to evolve . TPGO first models the MAS as a Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) , where agents, tools, and workflows are modular, op-timizable nodes. To guide evolution, we de-rive "textual gradients" , structured natural language feedback from execution traces, to pinpoint failures and suggest granular modifica-tions. The core of our framework is Group Rel-ative Agent Optimization (GRAO) , a novel 

meta-learning strategy that learns from his-torical optimization experiences. By analyzing past successes and failures, GRAO becomes progressively better at proposing effective up-dates, allowing the system to learn how to opti-mize itself . Extensive experiments on complex benchmarks like GAIA and MCP-Universe show that TPGO significantly enhances the per-formance of state-of-the-art agent frameworks, achieving higher success rates through auto-mated, self-improving optimization .

1 Introduction 

The rapid advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catalyzed a paradigm shift in artifi-cial intelligence, moving from passive question-answering interfaces to autonomous agents capa-ble of tool use and decision-making. This evolu-tion has recently culminated in the development of Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) , where diverse 

> ∗Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The pipelines of Traditional Agent Engineer-ing and the proposed TPGO in multi-agent system opti-mization. 

agents collaborate to solve complex, multi-step problems ranging from software engineering to open-ended reasoning (Park et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2023). By decomposing intri-cate tasks into specialized sub-routines, MAS have demonstrated capabilities that significantly surpass solitary LLMs. However, the efficacy of these systems is crit-ically dependent on the precise configuration of their textual components. An "Agent Engi-neer" must meticulously craft not only the system prompts for individual agents but also the descrip-tions of tools, the protocols for inter-agent commu-nication, and the overarching workflow (Talebirad and Nadiri, 2023; Luo et al., 2025a; Tran et al., 2025). This process, often termed Agent Engi-neering , represents a high-dimensional and unstruc-tured optimization challenge. As illustrated in Fig-ure 1(a), the opaque and non-deterministic nature of MAS interactions makes manual tuning a labor-intensive trial-and-error process that is difficult to scale and rarely converges to an optimal state. This establishes the automatic optimization of MAS 

as a crucial, yet unsolved, frontier. In real-world applications, this optimization chal-lenge manifests in two primary forms. On the one hand, exploratory optimization addresses settings 

> arXiv:2604.20714v1 [cs.AI] 22 Apr 2026

where the system must improve without a "golden" answer, relying on self-correction from execution feedback. On the other hand, imitative optimiza-tion seeks to align the system’s behavior with de-sired outcomes by learning from expert demonstra-tions or ideal solutions. To alleviate this manual burden, the first wave of research has explored Automatic Prompt Optimiza-tion (APO) (Wang et al., 2023; Yuksekgonul et al., 2024). While promising, these methods fall short in addressing the unique complexities of MAS in two fundamental ways. First, they primarily focus on "flat" prompt optimization and lack the structural awareness required to navigate the intricate web of interactions within a multi-agent architecture. A system failure often stems not from a single flawed prompt, but from a subtle bug in a tool’s definition, a logical gap in the workflow, or a misaligned com-munication protocol, components that current APO methods are ill-equipped to identify and correct (Fang et al., 2025). Second, and more fundamen-tally, existing optimizers are static ; they do not learn from the optimization process itself. They execute a search or apply a gradient-like update for a given problem, but they lack the mechanism to internalize past failures and successes to become better optimizers over time. This exposes a critical pain point: for MAS to achieve true autonomy, the optimization system itself must learn to evolve .This forms the core motivation for our work: to create an optimizer that not only refines the agent system but also refines its own optimization strat-egy through experience. To bridge these gaps, we propose Textual Pa-rameter Graph Optimization (TPGO) , a novel framework that re-conceptualizes MAS optimiza-tion as a graph evolution problem , as depicted in Figure 1(b). To address the structural challenge, we first formalize the system’s configuration as a 

Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) . In this repre-sentation, agents, tools, and logical units are modu-lar nodes, and their interactions are directed edges. This structured view allows us to move beyond flat text editing to perform targeted, structural modifi-cations on the system’s architecture. Crucially, to enable the optimizer to evolve, we introduce Group Relative Agent Optimization (GRAO) , a meta-learning mechanism that acts as the "brain" of the optimization process. By cluster-ing historical error patterns and retrieving success-ful past optimization strategies, GRAO learns to generate more effective and targeted update propos-als over time. It uses Textual Gradients , structured natural language feedback from execution traces, as its input signal, allowing it to reason about and cor-rect semantic errors within the graph. In essence, GRAO empowers our framework to "learn how to optimize." 

Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We propose TPGO , the first framework to treat multi-agent system optimization as a 

graph evolution problem , enabling both structural and semantic refinement of complex agent architectures. • We introduce the Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) , a structured representation that disen-tangles monolithic textual configurations into modular, individually optimizable semantic units. • We design Group Relative Agent Optimiza-tion (GRAO) , a novel self-evolving meta-optimization strategy that leverages histor-ical experience to continuously improve the quality of its optimization proposals. • Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework significantly enhances the per-formance and efficiency of state-of-the-art (SOTA) agent systems on complex bench-marks, achieving higher success rates through 

automated, evolutionary optimization .

2 Related Work 

2.1 Language Agent Systems 

While single-agent systems (SAS) such as the Re-Act framework (Yao et al., 2023) offer simplicity and efficiency, their capabilities are inherently lim-ited. To overcome these limitations, LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) have emerged as a pow-erful paradigm for complex problem-solving. The prevailing design methodology involves decompos-ing a task into sub-tasks and assigning them to specialized agents that emulate collaborative hu-man teams (Park et al., 2023; Guo et al., 2024). This approach, however, introduces a vast design space with numerous critical choices that shape collaboration and behavior. For instance, at the system level, designers must define the collabora-tion structure, choosing from predefined workflows like hierarchical organizations (e.g., MaCTG; Zhao et al., 2024), iterative refinement, or multi-agent debate. At the agent level, their behavior is further guided by manually crafted personas (Lin et al., 2025), which is crucial for achieving sophisticated outcomes beyond single-agent performance. Con-sequently, the overall system performance is highly sensitive to this vast array of design choices, includ-ing the composition of the agent team, the collab-oration mechanism, the communication protocol, and the specific configuration of each agent’s per-sona and proactivity (Zhang et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2025). 

2.2 Automatic Prompt Optimization 

Recent efforts in automatic prompt optimization have pursued three primary directions. Search-based methods, such as PromptAgent (Wang et al., 2023), leverage MCTS for strategic exploration. Evolutionary algorithms like EvoPrompt (Tong et al., 2025) iteratively evolve prompts to select for high-performing candidates. In contrast, gradient-based approaches such as TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024) frame prompts as differentiable param-eters, optimizing them through backpropagation. A shared limitation of these methods is their focus on textual content over system architecture. They optimize individual prompts in isolation but are ill-equipped to resolve failures originating from the complex interplay of agents, tools, and logic in a Multi-Agent System. Lacking the ability to mod-ify the system’s interaction structure, current APO techniques leave core architectural problems un-solved. Our work directly confronts this challenge by introducing a structurally-aware optimization framework. 

3 Task Definition 

The central problem this paper addresses is the automated optimization of Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). The performance of an MAS is dictated by its configuration, a complex collection of tex-tual components that includes agent prompts, tool descriptions, and interaction protocols. The man-ual process of tuning these components, known as Agent Engineering, is a laborious and unsys-tematic endeavor. The high dimensionality and non-deterministic nature of LLM interactions make this optimization landscape exceedingly difficult to navigate, with no guarantee of convergence to an optimal state. 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We formalize a multi-agent system A as being pa-rameterized by a collection of configurable natural language elements, which we term textual param-eters Θ. These parameters encompass all the sys-tem’s textual components, such as system prompts for each agent {Pi}, descriptions of available tools 

{Dj }, and the rules governing inter-agent commu-nication. Given a downstream task distribution T , repre-sented by a dataset of input-output pairs (Q, A ) = 

{(qk, a k)}Nk=1 , the system A(Θ) takes an input query qk and produces a final output ˆak. This execu-tion generates a corresponding trajectory τk, which is a detailed record of the agents’ intermediate rea-soning steps, tool calls, and communications. The objective is to discover the optimal set of textual parameters Θ∗ that maximizes the system’s performance as measured by a reward metric R

(e.g., success rate). This optimization problem can be expressed as: 

Θ∗ = arg max  

> Θ∈S

E(q,a )∼T [R(A(Θ , q ), a )] (1) where S represents the vast, discrete, and unstruc-tured space of all possible textual configurations. The intractability of navigating S is the primary ob-stacle, as conventional optimization methods and exhaustive search are infeasible. Our work aims to automate this discovery process, creating a system that can methodically and efficiently explore this space to find high-performing configurations. The proposed framework, Textual Parameter Graph Op-timization (TPGO), is designed to impose structure on this problem and enable a learning-based search for Θ∗, as detailed in the following section. 

4 Methodology 

4.1 Overview 

To enable autonomous self-evolution in complex multi-agent systems, our framework, Textual Pa-rameter Graph Optimization (TPGO) , reframes the entire system as a structured, optimizable object. We posit that the essence of any LLM-based agent, including its role, logic, and capabilities, is en-capsulated within its textual configuration. TPGO operates in a closed-loop cycle designed to system-atically refine this configuration, as illustrated in Figure 2. The cycle consists of three core phases: (1) Graph Construction , where opaque prompts are decomposed into a transparent and modular Textual Parameter Graph (TPG); (2) Gradient-Driven Evolution , where semantic feedback sig-nals called "textual gradients" are derived from Figure 2: Overview of the Textual Parameter Graph Optimization (TPGO) framework. The framework operates in a closed-loop cycle: (1) Graph Construction , where unstructured agent prompts are disentangled into a structured Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) ; (2) Gradient-Driven Evolution , which generates semantic Textual Gradients from execution trajectories to diagnose faults; and (3) Group Relative Agent Optimization (GRAO) , a meta-learning module that leverages an optimization experience memory to guide the Optimizer LLM in generating effective graph updates ( ∆G). 

execution traces to guide graph updates; and (3) 

Group Relative Agent Optimization (GRAO) , a meta-optimization layer that enables the optimizer itself to learn and improve from experience. This holistic design ensures that both the agent system and the optimization process evolve in tandem. 

4.2 Textual Parameter Graph 

Standard multi-agent systems often rely on mono-lithic, unstructured textual prompts to define agent behaviors, an approach that is brittle, difficult to debug, and opaque to systematic optimization. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a novel representation for the system’s textual configura-tion Θ, which we formalize as a directed Textual Parameter Graph (TPG), denoted by G = ( V, E).This graph structure disassembles the system’s logic into modular, inspectable, and individually optimizable components. 

Node Representation ( V). Each node vi ∈ V 

represents a discrete semantic unit of the system. We generate these nodes by hierarchically decom-posing the initial system prompts using a dedicated Parser LLM. This process supports a nested graph structure, where high-level agents can form a main graph, while their specific components are mod-eled as interconnected subgraphs. The set of nodes encompasses three primary types: • Role Nodes: Define an agent’s core persona, high-level objectives, and strategic directives. • Logic Nodes: Encapsulate specific reasoning protocols, operational constraints, or chained thought processes. • Tool Nodes: Contain functional descriptions, API specifications, and usage examples for external tools. The complete textual configuration Θ is constituted by the aggregation of content from all nodes, such that Θ = S 

> vi∈V

Content (vi).

Edge Representation and System Dynamics ( E). 

The directed edges E model the dependencies and logical flow between semantic units. An edge eij 

from node vi to vj signifies that the content of 

vi informs, constrains, or provides context for vj .These edges are crucial for defining the system’s dy-namic behavior by representing relationships such as intra-agent flow connecting a Role Node to a Logic Node, tool integration linking a Logic Node to a Tool Node, and inter-agent communication established by connecting nodes across different agent subgraphs. 

Graph-based Optimization. This graph-based representation transforms the challenge of prompt engineering into a structured graph optimization problem. It enables fine-grained manipulation of the agent system’s behavior through two primary mechanisms. First, through node content refine-ment , the text within a specific node can be modi-fied for targeted updates, analogous to parameter tuning in traditional models. For example, edit-ing a Tool Node’s content can improve an agent’s ability to use it correctly. Second, via structural modification , the graph’s topology can be altered to dynamically change system capabilities. Prun-ing an edge to a Tool Node can revoke an agent’s access to that tool, while adding new nodes and edges can introduce new skills or agents into the system. This structured approach facilitates not only manual debugging but also automated system evolution. 

4.3 Gradient-Driven Evolution 

Given the system’s representation as a Textual Pa-rameter Graph (TPG) G, our objective is to iter-atively refine G to maximize task performance. Since traditional gradient-based optimization is not applicable to discrete textual structures, we intro-duce a novel paradigm centered on Textual Gra-dients . These are structured natural language cri-tiques and suggestions that guide the evolution of the graph through a three-stage process of genera-tion, aggregation, and application. 

Step 1: Trajectory Diagnosis and Gradient Gen-eration. For a given batch of tasks, the MAS is executed to collect a set of trajectories T =

{τ1, . . . , τ N }. Each trajectory τk is a detailed log of the system’s reasoning, tool use, and commu-nication. A diagnostic model then analyzes these trajectories, comparing them against ground-truth solutions or ideal behaviors to identify discrepan-cies. From this analysis, the model generates a textual gradient ∇text for each informative trajec-tory, which provides a rich, interpretable signal for improvement: ∇text = Generate (τk) → { δ+, δ −}.This gradient is composed of two parts: • Positive Gradient ( δ+): Extracted from suc-cessful trajectories, δ+ distills high-quality reasoning patterns or effective tool-use strate-gies. It serves as a template for reinforcing correct behaviors (e.g., "The agent correctly broke down the problem into sub-steps A, B, and C."). • Negative Gradient ( δ−): Generated from failed trajectories, δ− pinpoints specific er-rors like hallucinations or tool misuse and suggests a corrective action (e.g., "The agent hallucinated a parameter for the search tool; it should have used list _parameters first."). 

Step 2: Gradient Aggregation via Clustering. 

Applying updates from every individual negative gradient δ− can be inefficient and lead to noisy, conflicting modifications. To address this, we ag-gregate gradients to identify systemic error patterns. We employ a semantic clustering approach on the set of all generated negative gradients {δ− 

> k

}. By embedding the textual descriptions of errors, we group them into clusters, where each cluster repre-sents a recurring type of failure, such as "misunder-standing a specific tool’s constraints" or "inefficient inter-agent communication." This step allows the system to target underlying root causes rather than fixing isolated faults. 

Step 3: Generating and Applying Optimization Proposals. For each error cluster, an Optimizer LLM generates a concrete Optimization Proposal ,

∆G. This proposal is a machine-readable plan to modify the TPG, taking the representative error description from the cluster and the current graph 

G as input. It outputs a set of specific graph edit operations, such as: • REWRITE_NODE(v, new_content) : Modifies the text of a node. • PRUNE_EDGE(u, v) : Removes a connection to disable a faulty pathway. • ADD_NODE(v_new, content) : Introduces a new skill or constraint. • ADD_EDGE(u, v) : Establishes a new depen-dency or logical flow. Finally, the proposal is applied to the graph to pro-duce the evolved version G′ ← G ⊕ ∆G, where ⊕

denotes the application of the modifications. This iterative cycle drives the evolution of the agent sys-tem. 4.4 Self-Evolving Optimization via GRAO 

The gradient-driven evolution process relies on an 

Optimizer LLM to generate optimization proposals (∆G). However, a static optimizer may repeatedly suggest ineffective modifications. We introduce 

Group Relative Agent Optimization (GRAO) ,a meta-optimization framework designed to make the optimization process itself self-improving. The core principle of GRAO is to create a feedback loop where the system learns from the efficacy of its past optimizations to generate better proposals in the future. This is achieved through a cycle of validation, memorization, and adaptive in-context learning. 

Optimization Validation and Effectiveness Scor-ing. After an optimization proposal ∆G is ap-plied to create an evolved graph G′, its impact is empirically validated. To avoid the high cost of a full re-evaluation, we perform targeted validation: the new agent configuration A(G′) is run specifi-cally on the subset of tasks that contributed to the error cluster being addressed. By comparing the new outcomes to the previous failures, we compute an effectiveness score , E(∆ G) ∈ [0 , 1] , which quantifies the proposal’s success rate on the prob-lematic task subset. 

Building an Optimization Experience Memory. 

Each optimization attempt is recorded as a struc-tured entry in a persistent Optimization Experi-ence Memory . This memory serves as a knowl-edge base of what has been tried and how well it worked. Each entry is a tuple containing three key components: • Problem Context ( C): The semantic descrip-tion of the error cluster that prompted the op-timization. • Solution Proposal ( ∆G): The specific set of graph edit operations that were applied. • Outcome ( E): The resulting effectiveness score from the validation step. Over time, this memory accumulates a rich dataset of problem-solution-outcome triplets, documenting the system’s learning journey. 

Adaptive Proposal Generation via In-Context Learning. The Optimization Experience Mem-ory enables the Optimizer LLM to evolve from a naive reasoner into an expert guided by experi-ence. When a new error cluster with description 

Cnew is identified, the GRAO mechanism initiates a retrieval-augmented generation process. First, it retrieves historical problem contexts {Ck} from memory that are semantically similar to the cur-rent problem Cnew , forming a "group" of related issues. Second, these retrieved experiences are ranked by their effectiveness scores {Ek}, a "group relative" ranking that identifies which past opti-mization strategies have been most successful for this class of error. Finally, the highest-ranked ex-emplars are formatted as few-shot examples and prepended to the context of the Optimizer LLM .By being presented with concrete examples of suc-cessful fixes for similar problems, the optimizer is primed to generate a more targeted and higher-quality proposal ∆Gnew . This meta-learning cycle transforms the optimizer from a static component into a dynamic, learning entity, enabling the entire system to learn how to improve itself more effec-tively over time. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate TPGO in two representative optimiza-tion settings for agent systems: exploratory op-timization , where improvement must be driven by execution feedback without a gold trajectory, and imitative optimization , where the system is optimized toward a known correct outcome. Our experiments are designed to answer three questions: (1) whether TPGO consistently improves agent per-formance in both settings; (2) which components of TPGO are most responsible for these gains; and (3) whether GRAO improves the stability and gen-eralization of iterative optimization. We conduct experiments on MCP-Universe and GAIA, using ReAct and MiroFlow as representative agent frame-works with different backbone models. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Benchmarks. We evaluate our framework on two challenging benchmarks, each representing one of the core optimization scenarios. MCP-Universe (Luo et al., 2025b) serves as our testbed for exploratory optimization . It is a comprehensive benchmark evaluating LLMs on tasks that require interacting with real-world servers and using large tool spaces. Success is determined by task com-pletion, forcing the agent to rely on self-correction from execution feedback as there is no "golden" path. GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023) is chosen for 

imitative optimization . As a widely recognized Table 1: Performance on the MCP-Universe benchmark, an exploratory optimization scenario. TPGO significantly enhances the success rate of ReAct agents across all four complex task domains by learning from execution feedback. 

Model Repository Management 3D Designing Browser Automation Web Searching Overall Success Rate 

ReAct(GPT-4.1) 36.70 55.26 26.41 5.45 30.96 + TPGO(1 iters.) 40.79 52.63 27.05 8.33 32.2 + TPGO(3 iters.) 41.21 60.53 32.41 12.73 36.72 + TPGO(5 iters.) 41.21 (+4.51) 65.79 (+10.53) 33.74 (+7.33) 14.55 (+9.10) 38.82 (+7.86) 

ReAct(DeepSeek-V3.2) 42.18 60.03 20.51 16.36 34.77 + TPGO(1 iters.) 40.85 60.52 20.38 17.14 34.72 + TPGO(3 iters.) 44.18 63.16 26.13 21.81 38.82 + TPGO(5 iters.) 45.52 (+3.34) 63.16 (+3.13) 28.03 (+7.52) 30.73 (+14.37) 41.86 (+7.16) 

Table 2: Performance on the GAIA validation set, an imitative optimization scenario. TPGO boosts the success rate of the MiroFlow baseline by learning to align with the correct final answer, while also halving the average execution time. 

Model Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Overall Avg Time (s) 

MiroFlow (GPT-5) 78.8 77.5 44.4 73.8 4014 + TPGO(1 iters.) 76.9 71.2 45.5 70.59 3680 + TPGO(3 iters.) 82.1 73.1 54.5 75.7 2278 + TPGO(5 iters.) 90.6 (+15.0%) 79.1 (+2.1%) 63.6 (+43.2%) 81.6 (+10.6%) 1765 (-56.0%) 

Table 3: Ablation of key TPGO design choices on the Browser Automation subset of MCP-Universe. 

Method Success Rate 

TPGO (full) 28.03 

w/o Textual Parameter Graph 25.13 w/o Structural Graph Edits 24.90 w/o Clustering 26.52 w/ Random Clustering 19.97 benchmark for General AI Assistants, it provides tasks with a verifiable "golden" final answer. This allows TPGO to optimize the agent’s behavior to align with the desired, correct outcome. We re-port performance on its validation set across three difficulty levels. 

Baseline Systems. We apply TPGO to two dis-tinct agent systems to demonstrate its general ap-plicability. ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) is a foun-dational agent architecture combining reasoning and acting. We use ReAct agents with both GPT-4.1 and DeepSeek-V3.2 as backbone models on the MCP-Universe benchmark. MiroFlow (Team, 2025) is a state-of-the-art open-source framework for building agents capable of complex reasoning. We implement a MiroFlow agent using GPT-5 as the backbone model for the GAIA benchmark. 

Implementation Details. Unless otherwise spec-ified, the ReAct agents use temperature = 1 .0 and top-p = 1 .0 with GPT-4.1 or DeepSeek-V3.2 as the execution backbone. For MiroFlow on GAIA, the main agent uses GPT-5 with reasoning effort set to 

high , while sub-agents use GPT-5 with reasoning effort set to medium ; both use temperature = 1 .0

and top-p = 1 .0. All TPG parsing, textual-gradient generation, and optimization proposal generation are performed by Gemini-2.5-Pro with temperature 

= 0 .7 and top-p = 0 .95 . For gradient aggregation, we embed negative textual gradients and cluster them using DBSCAN to identify recurring failure patterns without pre-specifying the number of clus-ters. For each cluster, the optimizer generates a graph-edit proposal, which is then validated on the corresponding task subset before being added to the optimization memory. We run TPGO for up to 5 iterations unless otherwise noted. 

Metrics. We evaluate performance using two pri-mary metrics. Success Rate (pass@1) is the per-centage of tasks where the system produces the cor-rect final answer in a single attempt, serving as our primary metric for effectiveness. Average Time is the wall-clock time in seconds from task initiation to completion, measuring system efficiency. 

5.2 Main Results and Analysis 

This section addresses our first research question by comparing the performance of baseline systems with and without the TPGO framework across both optimization scenarios. 

Performance in Exploratory Optimization (MCP-Universe) As shown in Table 1, applying TPGO in an exploratory setting leads to substan-tial performance gains. For the GPT-4.1-based Re-Act agent, the overall success rate improves from 30.96% to 38.82%, a relative increase of 25.4%. The improvement is most pronounced in the Web Searching domain, where the success rate increases from 5.45% to 14.55%. This suggests that by learn-ing from execution failures, TPGO effectively iden-tified and rectified systemic flaws in the agent’s tool-use logic. Similar gains with the DeepSeek-V3.2 agent, especially in Web Searching (+14.37 points), further demonstrate TPGO’s ability to op-timize agents for diverse and complex workflows based on environmental feedback alone. 

Performance in Imitative Optimization (GAIA) 

The results on the GAIA benchmark, presented in Table 2, demonstrate TPGO’s effectiveness in an imitative setting, even when applied to a strong baseline like MiroFlow. By optimizing towards a known correct answer, TPGO improves the overall pass@1 success rate from 73.8% to 81.6%, a rela-tive improvement of 10.6%. Notably, TPGO also significantly enhances system efficiency, reducing the average time per task by 56.0% (from 4014s to 1765s). This gain stems from the optimization process pruning inefficient reasoning paths and re-fining agent logic to more directly reach the desired solution. The largest performance gain is on the most difficult (Level 3) tasks, where the success rate increases from 44.4% to 63.6%, showing that TPGO improves the system’s core capabilities for handling complex problems. 

5.3 Ablation Study 

To answer our second research question and iden-tify which design choices are most responsible for TPGO’s gains, we conduct a component-level ab-lation study on the Browser Automation subset of MCP-Universe. Starting from the same ReAct 0 1 2 3 4 5

> Optimization Iteration
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Success Rate (%)
> Stable Convergence
> Catastrophic Forgetting
> TPGO (with GRAO)
> TPGO (w/o GRAO)

Figure 3: Optimization stability with and without GRAO. Success rate on MCP-Universe Browser Au-tomation over five optimization iterations. TPGO with GRAO improves steadily, while the variant without GRAO suffers from catastrophic forgetting. 

baseline, we selectively disable one design compo-nent at a time and report the resulting success rate in Table 3. The results show that all three components make meaningful contributions. First, removing the Tex-tual Parameter Graph and reverting to mono-lithic prompt rewriting lowers performance by 2.90 points, confirming that structured modularization is important for effective optimization. Second, dis-abling structural graph edits causes a 3.13-point drop, indicating that TPGO’s gains do not come solely from local text rewriting, but also from the ability to modify agent structure and dependen-cies. Third, clustering improves the quality of optimization signals: removing clustering reduces performance to 26.52, while replacing semantic clustering with random grouping causes a severe drop to 19.97. This suggests that coherent aggrega-tion of similar failure patterns is crucial, and that noisy grouping can be actively harmful. Overall, these results indicate that the graph rep-resentation, structural edit space, and semantic clus-tering mechanism are complementary components of TPGO rather than interchangeable implementa-tion details. 

5.4 Optimization Stability Analysis 

We further examine whether GRAO improves the 

stability of iterative optimization. On the Browser Automation subset of MCP-Universe, we compare the full TPGO (with GRAO) against TPGO (w/o GRAO) , where the Optimizer LLM updates the policy using only the latest error cluster, without re-trieving historical optimization experiences. Both variants start from the same ReAct baseline, and we track success rate over five optimization iterations. Figure 3 shows that GRAO is crucial for stable it-Table 4: Cross-domain generalization on MCP-Universe. TPGO is optimized on Browser Automation only.             

> Method Browser Web Repo 3D
> ReAct (DS-V3.2) 20.51 16.36 42.18 60.03 + TPGO 28.03 18.18 44.91 63.16

erative improvement. Both variants start at 26.41%. With GRAO, TPGO improves steadily to 33.74% 

by iteration 3 and then remains stable. Without GRAO, performance is much less stable: it peaks at 30.03% in iteration 2, but then drops sharply to 14.55% by iteration 4, far below the initial baseline. This suggests that, without historical context, the optimizer overfits to recent failures and introduces updates that hurt previously acquired capabilities. Overall, GRAO improves both final performance and optimization robustness by mitigating catas-trophic forgetting. 

5.5 Cross-Domain Generalization 

To examine whether TPGO merely overfits to the task subset used for targeted validation, we con-duct a cross-domain generalization study on MCP-Universe. We optimize the DeepSeek-V3.2-based ReAct agent using only the Browser Automation domain and then evaluate the resulting agent on three unseen domains without further optimization. As shown in Table 4, TPGO improves not only the in-domain Browser Automation tasks (+7.52), but also transfers to Web Searching (+1.82), Repository Management (+2.73), and 3D Designing (+3.13). These results suggest that the learned updates cap-ture more general improvements in tool use and agent behavior rather than merely memorizing domain-specific fixes. 

5.6 Cost-Benefit Analysis 

TPGO introduces additional optimization overhead, so we analyze its cost-benefit trade-off on GAIA. For one full optimization iteration, TPGO con-sumes 19.9M tokens and 1380 seconds of wall-clock time under 8-way concurrency, correspond-ing to an amortized cost of 73.7K tokens and 5.6 seconds per trajectory. This one-time offline op-timization cost is small relative to the baseline agent’s average execution time of 4014 seconds per task. In return, the optimized system improves overall success rate from 73.8% to 81.6% and re-duces average execution time by 56.0%. This indi-cates that TPGO is practical when optimization is 

> Table 5: Cost-benefit analysis of one TPGO optimiza-tion iteration on GAIA.

Metric Value 

Total token usage 19.9M Total wall-clock time 1380s Amortized token usage / trajectory 73.7K Amortized wall-clock time / trajectory 5.6s amortized over repeated deployment. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced Textual Parameter Graph Optimiza-tion (TPGO), a framework that improves agent systems through structured graph evolution rather than flat prompt tuning. By decomposing agent configurations into modular textual components, refining them with execution-grounded textual-gradient signals, and leveraging optimization mem-ory through GRAO, TPGO enables more stable and effective agent optimization. Experiments on MCP-Universe and GAIA show consistent gains in both effectiveness and efficiency, suggesting that structured, experience-informed optimization is a promising approach for reducing the manual bur-den of agent engineering. 

7 Limitations 

TPGO has several limitations. It is an empirical framework without formal optimization guarantees, since “textual gradients” are heuristic feedback sig-nals rather than analytical gradients. Its optimiza-tion loop can also be costly, as each proposal must be validated on task subsets, which may limit scala-bility on larger benchmarks or more complex agent systems. In addition, TPGO depends on the capa-bilities of the underlying LLMs used for parsing, diagnosis, and proposal generation; weaker mod-els may yield noisier feedback or less effective updates. Finally, our current implementation is limited to textual parameter optimization with a predefined set of graph edit operations, and does not yet consider backbone model selection, numer-ical hyperparameters, or richer structural changes such as node merging and subgraph generation. 

8 Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by Alibaba Group through Alibaba Research Intern Program References 

Jinyuan Fang, Yanwen Peng, Xi Zhang, Yingxu Wang, Xinhao Yi, Guibin Zhang, Yi Xu, Bin Wu, Siwei Liu, Zihao Li, and 1 others. 2025. A comprehensive survey of self-evolving ai agents: A new paradigm bridging foundation models and lifelong agentic sys-tems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07407 .Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xi-angliang Zhang. 2024. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. In 

Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2024, Jeju, South Korea, August 3-9, 2024 , pages 8048– 8057. ijcai.org. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, and 1 others. 2023. Metagpt: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Yi-Cheng Lin, Kang-Chieh Chen, Zhe-Yan Li, Tzu-Heng Wu, Tzu-Hsuan Wu, Kuan-Yu Chen, Hung-yi Lee, and Yun-Nung Chen. 2025. Creativity in llm-based multi-agent systems: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.21116 .Junyu Luo, Weizhi Zhang, Ye Yuan, Yusheng Zhao, Junwei Yang, Yiyang Gu, Bohan Wu, Binqi Chen, Ziyue Qiao, Qingqing Long, and 1 others. 2025a. Large language model agent: A survey on method-ology, applications and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21460 .Ziyang Luo, Zhiqi Shen, Wenzhuo Yang, Zirui Zhao, Prathyusha Jwalapuram, Amrita Saha, Doyen Sa-hoo, Silvio Savarese, Caiming Xiong, and Junnan Li. 2025b. Mcp-universe: Benchmarking large lan-guage models with real-world model context protocol servers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.14704 .Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simu-lacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST 2023, San Francisco, CA, USA, 29 October 2023- 1 November 2023 , pages 2:1–2:22. ACM. Yashar Talebirad and Amirhossein Nadiri. 2023. Multi-agent collaboration: Harnessing the power of intelli-gent llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03314 .MiroMind AI Team. 2025. Miroflow: A high-performance open-source research agent framework. 

https://github.com/MiroMindAI/MiroFlow .Zeliang Tong, Zhuojun Ding, and Wei Wei. 2025. Evo-prompt: Evolving prompts for enhanced zero-shot named entity recognition with large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 5136–5153. Khanh-Tung Tran, Dung Dao, Minh-Duong Nguyen, Quoc-Viet Pham, Barry O’Sullivan, and Hoang D Nguyen. 2025. Multi-agent collaboration mech-anisms: A survey of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06322 .Xinyuan Wang, Chenxi Li, Zhen Wang, Fan Bai, Haotian Luo, Jiayou Zhang, Nebojsa Jojic, Eric P Xing, and Zhiting Hu. 2023. Promptagent: Strategic planning with language models enables expert-level prompt optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16427 .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and James Zou. 2024. Textgrad: Automatic" differentiation" via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496 .Jintian Zhang, Xin Xu, Ningyu Zhang, Ruibo Liu, Bryan Hooi, and Shumin Deng. 2024. Exploring collaboration mechanisms for LLM agents: A so-cial psychology view. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL 2024, Bangkok, Thailand, August 11-16, 2024 , pages 14544–14607. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Zixiao Zhao, Jing Sun, Zhe Hou, Zhiyuan Wei, Cheng-Hao Cai, Miao Qiao, and Jin Song Dong. 2024. Mactg: Multi-agent collaborative thought graph for automatic programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.19245 .

A LLM usage 

ChatGPT 1 was used purely with the language of the paper during the writing process, including spell-checking and paraphrasing the authors’ original content, without suggesting new content. Any con-tent generated with the assistant underwent meticu-lous manual review and subsequently received final approval from the authors. 

> 1https://chat.openai.com/

B Ethical Considerations 

No human participants, crowdsourcing, or person-ally identifiable information (PII) were involved in this research. All experiments were conducted on public benchmarks and standard evaluation splits. This work studies the automatic optimization of multi-agent systems through textual configuration updates. A potential risk is that improving agent reasoning, tool use, and coordination may also in-crease the capabilities of such systems in ways that could be misused. To mitigate this concern, we restrict our study to benchmark-based evaluation in controlled settings and do not investigate harmful tasks or safety-sensitive real-world deployment. In addition, our framework relies on LLM-generated feedback and optimization proposals, which may reflect model errors or biases. Ac-cordingly, the optimized systems should not be interpreted as having formal safety guarantees. We therefore view TPGO as a research frame-work intended for controlled experimentation, and any practical deployment should include appropri-ate human oversight and application-specific safe-guards. 

C Implementation Details 

Models and optimization budget. We im-plement TPGO through an OpenAI-compatible API interface. Unless otherwise specified, 

gemini-2.5-pro is used for all meta-optimization components, including the Parser LLM , the Gra-dient Generator (Reflector), and the Optimizer LLM . These modules use temperature 0.7 and top-

p = 0 .95 . Each API call is retried up to three times with exponential backoff. In all main experi-ments, we run TPGO for at most five optimization iterations. 

Datasets and optimization settings. For MCP-Universe (Luo et al., 2025b), we use the evaluated subset reported in the main results, covering 146 tasks from four domains: Repository Manage-ment , 3D Designing , Browser Automation , and 

Web Searching . This benchmark is used in an 

exploratory optimization setting, where the Gra-dient Generator analyzes execution traces without access to gold answers. For GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023), we start from the public validation split of 

165 questions and filter it to a text-only subset of 142 tasks (Level 1: 49, Level 2: 71, Level 3: 22), matching our focus on textual reasoning and tool use. GAIA is used in an imitative optimization 

setting, where the Gradient Generator additionally receives the ground-truth final answer. To reduce answer leakage, the reflection prompt is instructed to generate generalized behavioral feedback rather than task-specific factual hints. 

Graph representation and updates. Each agent configuration is represented as a hierarchical JSON-serialized PromptNode structure corresponding to the Textual Parameter Graph (TPG). Nodes are typed as role , logic , or tool ; a legacy generic 

type is retained for compatibility with existing prompts. Graph updates are applied atomically at each iteration by a prompt manager that supports node rewriting, insertion, and deletion. 

Textual gradients and clustering. For each tra-jectory τk, the Reflector generates negative tex-tual gradients δ− that capture failure patterns and positive textual gradients δ+ that summarize effec-tive behaviors. Negative gradients are embedded and stored in a persistent vector database. We re-move near-duplicate entries by cosine-similarity filtering, then cluster the remaining gradients us-ing DBSCAN over all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence embeddings. In our experiments, DBSCAN uses 

ε = 0 .3 and min_samples = 2 . For ablations, we additionally consider variants without clustering and with random clustering. 

Optimization memory and rollback. GRAO maintains a persistent optimization experience memory. Each entry records the problem con-text, the proposed graph edit, its rationale, and the observed effectiveness score. When a new error cluster is encountered, candidate experiences are retrieved by semantic similarity and re-ranked by effectiveness; the highest-ranked positive and neg-ative exemplars are then used as in-context demon-strations for the Optimizer LLM. After each itera-tion, we monitor validation performance and roll back to the previous graph if an update degrades performance on the targeted validation subset. Un-successful updates are still retained in memory. For reproducibility, we archive all optimization arti-facts, including proposals, graph states, and run metadata, for every iteration. 

D Prompt Templates 

We present the main prompt templates for TPGO’s three LLM modules: Parser, Reflector, and Opti-mizer. For readability, we summarize the templates, retaining key instructions and output schemas. 

D.1 Graph Construction Prompt (Parser LLM) 

Parser System Prompt 

Role. Convert an agent prompt into a Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) .

Task. Decompose the input prompt into a hierarchical JSON structure of semantic units for later optimization. 

Node types. 

• role : persona, objectives, responsibilities, or high-level directives • logic : reasoning steps, constraints, verification rules, or workflow instructions • tool : tool descriptions, API usage rules, or tool exam-ples 

Key instructions. 

• Split by semantic function rather than formatting alone. • Parent nodes organize sections; leaf nodes contain ac-tual text. • Do not split atomic instructions, code blocks, JSON objects, or tightly coupled examples. • A node should contain either children or content ,but not both. • Preserve the original meaning; do not rewrite or opti-mize. 

Key output schema. 

{"title": "<root title>", "type": "generic", "children": [ { "title": "<node title>", "type": "<role|logic|tool|generic>", ... } ]}

User input. The model receives the prompt type and the original prompt text, and outputs its TPG decomposition. 

D.2 Trajectory Diagnosis Prompt (Reflector LLM) 

Reflector System Prompt 

Role. Analyze an execution trajectory and produce textual gradients .

Task. 

• Generate negative gradients (δ−): abstract failure pat-terns caused by the agent, such as poor reasoning, miss-ing verification, ineffective coordination, or tool mis-use. • Generate positive gradients (δ+): abstract successful patterns, such as systematic verification, effective tool use, or correct recovery behavior. 

Key instructions. 

• Describe generalizable behavioral patterns rather than task-specific facts. • Ignore failures caused purely by the environment or external services. • If a reference answer is provided, use it only to diagnose behavior; do not reveal or restate the answer. 

Example abstraction guidance. 

Bad: “The agent ignored that Ollie Watkins had 19 goals.” 

Good: “The agent failed to validate its candidate against all required constraints before producing a final answer.” 

Key output schema. 

{"summary": "<brief behavioral summary>", "error_list": ["<negative textual gradient>", ...], "experience_list": ["<positive textual gradient>", ...] }

User input. The model receives the task, the trajectory, and optionally a reference answer. 

D.3 Optimization Proposal Prompt (Optimizer LLM) 

Optimizer System Prompt 

Role. Given the current Textual Parameter Graph (TPG) 

and an error cluster, generate an optimization proposal 

∆G.

Inputs. 

• the current TPG G

• an error cluster Ck summarizing a recurring failure pattern • optional historical optimization experiences from 

GRAO , including similar contexts, graph edits, and effectiveness scores 

Goal. Propose minimal but effective graph edits that ad-dress the root cause while preserving useful behavior. 

Supported operations. 

• REWRITE_NODE(v, new_content) 

• PRUNE_EDGE(u, v) 

• ADD_NODE(v_new, content) 

• ADD_EDGE(u, v) 

Key instructions. 

• Diagnose the root cause before editing. • Prefer reusable fixes over task-specific patches. • If historical experiences are provided, imitate effective strategies and avoid ineffective ones. • Keep the proposal internally consistent with the current graph. 

Key output schema. 

{"problem_context": "<abstract failure pattern>", "modifications": [ {"operation": "REWRITE_NODE | PRUNE_EDGE | ADD_NODE | ADD_EDGE", "target": { ... }, "new_node": { ... }, "new_content": "<replacement content if applicable>", "addresses_errors": [<error indices>], "rationale": "<why this edit helps>" }]}

User input. The model receives the current TPG, the error cluster, and optional historical optimization experiences. Table 6: Analysis of a Representative Trajectory Failure 

Component Description Trajectory Flaw The agent identified Ollie Watkins but only validated 2 of 4 constraints (current season stats). It neglected to verify historical stats, concluding the task prema-turely. 

Identified Errors • Concluded the task without systematically verifying all specified constraints. • Focused verification on recent stats while neglecting equally critical historical data. 

Root Cause A behavioral tendency to stop investigation once a "good enough" candidate is found, rather than adhering to a strict protocol of validating every single constraint. 

> Table 7: Design of the Corrective Modification

Parameter Rationale & Implementation Action A new_node is created to inject a new, high-priority instruction into the agent’s core reasoning process. 

Content Strategy The new instruction establishes a non-skippable "Constraint Validation Protocol." It mandates a clear, multi-step process: (1) List all constraints, (2) Create a checklist, (3) Verify each item with evidence, (4) Proceed only when all items are verified. 

Rationale Creates a mandatory validation checkpoint to prevent premature conclusions and addresses systematic failures in constraint verification by requiring explicit checklist creation. 

Targeted Errors This modification directly resolves the error IDs associated with incomplete constraint validation and premature task conclusion. 

> Table 8: Content of the Resulting Prompt Modification

Component Content Detail Title Constraint Validation Protocol 

Core Instruction A direct command is inserted: "Before providing a final answer, you MUST:" 1. List ALL constraints explicitly. 2. Create a validation checklist .3. Verify each constraint with concrete evidence. 4. Mark each constraint as ✓VERIFIED or × UNVERIFIED. 5. Only proceed if ALL constraints are verified. 6. If any are unverified, continue investigation or acknowledge the limitation. 

Example Format A clear example is provided to guide the agent’s internal monologue, such as: 

[✓] Constraint 1... [ ×] Constraint 2... 

Rationale The node’s rationale explicitly states its purpose: "Creates a mandatory validation checkpoint to prevent premature conclusions and addresses systematic failures in constraint verification." E Case Study 

We present a representative case to illustrate how TPGO diagnoses a trajectory-level failure, maps it to a structured graph update, and produces an inter-pretable prompt modification. The failure pattern considered here is incomplete constraint valida-tion , a common error mode in which the agent iden-tifies a plausible answer candidate but terminates reasoning before verifying all task requirements. In the analyzed example, the agent was asked to identify a football player from multiple constraints. Although it correctly proposed Ollie Watkins as the final answer, its reasoning process was incom-plete. As shown in Table 6, the agent verified only a subset of the required conditions, focusing on current-season statistics while omitting historical evidence. The resulting failure is therefore not best characterized as a factual mistake, but as a procedu-ral error: the agent committed to an answer without exhaustively validating all constraints. TPGO addresses this issue by extracting the un-derlying behavioral cause from the trajectory rather than only evaluating the correctness of the final output. The analysis in Table 6 attributes the error to a systematic tendency toward premature termina-tion once a sufficiently plausible candidate is found. Such behavior is particularly problematic in agentic settings, where many tasks require explicit satisfac-tion of multiple constraints and partial verification can lead to confident but unjustified answers. Based on this diagnosis, TPGO generates a tar-geted optimization proposal at the graph level. As summarized in Table 7, the optimizer introduces a new high-priority node that encodes a Constraint Validation Protocol . Instead of broadly rewriting the full prompt, this update inserts a modular in-struction that requires the agent to enumerate all constraints, construct an explicit checklist, verify each item against evidence, and defer answering until all conditions have been checked. This illus-trates the central advantage of the Textual Parame-ter Graph representation: failures can be corrected through localized edits to semantically meaningful components. The resulting prompt modification is shown in Table 8. The inserted instruction operationalizes the intended behavioral change by requiring the agent to mark each constraint as verified or un-verified before producing a final answer. Notably, this intervention is task-agnostic: it does not inject task-specific facts or encode the correct answer, but instead imposes a reusable reasoning procedure that generalizes to other multi-constraint problems. Overall, this case exemplifies the full TPGO workflow: trajectory analysis identifies the latent failure pattern, graph-based optimization formu-lates a structured corrective update, and the final prompt modification instantiates that update as an explicit reasoning protocol. The example also high-lights a broader point: in complex agent systems, effective optimization often requires procedural re-finement rather than surface-level prompt rewriting. By making these refinements modular and inter-pretable, TPGO supports both automated optimiza-tion and post-hoc inspection.