Title: NeuIDO: Neural Intrinsic Dynamics Operator for Physics-Informed 4D World Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.24313v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 03:09:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# NeuIDO: Neural Intrinsic Dynamics Operator for Physics-Informed 4D World Models 

Jiajing Lin 1 , Xin Zhang 2 , and Jianhua Sun ⋆1 

> 1

School of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China  

> 2

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China 

Abstract. World models aim to capture environmental dynamics and predict future trajectories, showing growing potential for embodied in-telligence. Physics-informed 4D generation integrates physical simulation to predict 3D object interactions, offering a promising pathway toward world models. However, this paradigm relies on manually imposed dy-namical assumptions rather than internalizing world dynamics, and thus still leaves a gap toward a true world model. To bridge this gap, we pro-pose NeuIDO, a novel world dynamics modeling framework that learns a unified intrinsic dynamics representation from visual observations, ad-vancing physics-informed 4D generation toward a world model. Specifi-cally, we formulate world modeling as a neural operator learning problem and introduce a two-stage training strategy to learn a generalizable map-ping from the visual observation distribution to the intrinsic dynamics distribution. Building on this observation-dynamics mapping, NeuIDO enables zero-shot dynamics inference directly from videos and can be fur-ther aligned with complex real-world dynamics via few-shot adaptation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that NeuIDO effectively unifies the intrinsic dynamics underlying diverse visual observations into a shared representation and rapidly infers dynamics in novel scenes. 

Keywords: World Model · 4D Generation · Neural Operator 

## 1 Introduction 

World models [3,11,24] provide agents with an “imagination space” for planning and decision-making, and have shown great potential in applications such as au-tonomous driving [16,40] and robotics [9,44]. Most current world models [2,12,14] learn environment dynamics from large-scale 2D data (e.g., images or videos) and predict future states via 2D frame generation. Despite progress under this purely data-driven paradigm, the absence of explicit physical constraints and limited 3D spatial reasoning (e.g., inaccurate object layouts and relative relations) of-ten leads to predictions that violate fundamental physical principles [20] (e.g. conservation laws), limiting reliability for embodied decision-making.  

> ⋆

Corresponding author: Jianhua Sun (gothic@sjtu.edu.cn). arXiv:2609.24313v1 [cs.CV] 21 Sep 2026 2 J. Lin et al. Neural Cons,tu,ve Model Branch Network Trunk Network    

> Parameter: 𝑬, 𝜼
> Parameter: 𝑬, 𝜼
> 𝜏 = 2𝜇 𝐹 − 𝑅 𝐹 !…
> Fixed Corotated Elas/city

🔥 

🔥 

❄

🔥 Cons%tu%ve Func%on Representa%on Space 

> input output

🔥 

🔥 

🔥  

> Exis%ng Methods: Per-Scene Dynamics Op%miza%on Our Method: Unified Dynamics Representa%on
> PAC-NeRF[25], GIC[5] NeuMA[6], MASIV[55] VisionLaw[27]
> Elas@c Material Plas@c Material Granular Material
> Elas@c Material Plas@c Material Granular Material
> Instan&ate encode

Fig. 1: Existing approaches typically perform per-scene dynamics optimization, which is computationally expensive and generalizes poorly to unseen scenes. In contrast, 

NeuIDO learns a unified intrinsic dynamics representation that enables efficient zero-shot generalization, moving physics-informed 4D generation toward world modeling. 

In contrast, physics-informed 4D generation [29, 50] explicitly incorporates physical simulators to evolve 3D scenes over time. Such a paradigm enables physi-cally consistent movement prediction and provides an explicit 3D spatiotemporal representation, thus offering a promising avenue to mitigate the limitations of purely data-driven world models. However, physical simulation relies on access to the system’s intrinsic dynamics, whose core lies in the constitutive law [7] with specified material parameters that govern the object’s response under applied forces. These laws are typically imposed through hand-crafted assumptions. Humans can intuitively infer an object’s intrinsic dynamics through vision and predict its future evolution. To achieve such intuitive physical inference, recent methods have attempted to integrate differentiable renderers, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [21, 37], with differentiable simulators [41] in an end-to-end paradigm. Specifically, some methods [5, 25, 52] estimate unknown material parameters through visual super-vision. However, they rely on hand-crafted constitutive laws, making it difficult to align with the complex dynamics of the real world. Furthermore, another class of methods [6, 27, 55] attempts to learn neural or symbolic constitutive models from visual observations. However, these approaches independently infer object intrinsic dynamics from scratch for each scene, preventing the learning of a shared cross-scene dynamics structure and limiting efficient generalization to unseen scenes. As a result, they remain short of a true world model. To overcome the above challenges, we propose NeuIDO , a novel world dynam-ics modeling framework that learns a unified intrinsic dynamics representation from multi-scene video observations and supports efficient intrinsic dynamics inference for unseen scenes—thereby advancing physics-informed 4D generation NeuIDO 3

toward a world model. Inspired by the Universal Approximation Theorem (UAT) for neural operators—which states that neural operators can approximate con-tinuous mappings between infinite-dimensional function spaces—we cast world dynamics modeling as an operator learning problem. Specifically, we learn a mapping from an input (e.g., videos) function space to an output (e.g., con-stitutive laws) function space, enabling diverse intrinsic dynamics across scenes to be modeled within a unified framework. To reduce the complexity of oper-ator learning, we further propose a two-stage training strategy: (i) pretraining the structural representation space of the constitutive function from large-scale known laws to inject dynamical priors; and (ii) aligning videos with this learned representation space so that each observation is interpreted as a manifestation of intrinsic dynamics. Leveraging this observation–dynamics operator mapping, 

NeuIDO enables real-time zero-shot intrinsic dynamics inference from videos. Furthermore, to better capture complex real-world dynamics, it supports effi-cient few-shot adaptation via lightweight fine-tuning on visual observations. Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

– We propose a world dynamics modeling framework that learns a unified intrinsic dynamics representation from visual observations across multiple scenes, advancing physics-informed 4D generation toward a true world model. 

– We formulate world dynamics modeling as an operator learning problem and address optimization challenges with a two-stage strategy: (i) structured dy-namics representation learning and (ii) observation-to-dynamics alignment. 

– Extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that NeuIDO effectively models shared cross-scene dynamics structure and achieves real-time zero-shot generalization with efficient few-shot adaptation. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Physics-Informed 4D Interaction 

In recent years, 3D representations [21, 37, 49] have increasingly been coupled with physics simulators [35,38,41] to enable interactive 4D dynamics [26,28,29]. PIE-NeRF [10] couples NeRF with a mesh-free elastodynamics simulator, Phys-Gaussian [50] combines 3DGS with an MPM simulator [41], and VR-GS [19] en-ables real-time VR interaction through fast XPBD-based simulation [35]. How-ever, these approaches rely on expert-specified constitutive laws and carefully tuned parameters. PAC-NeRF [25] and GIC [5] perform differentiable simulation-based identification from multi-view videos. Another line of work, such as Phys-Dreamer, DreamPhysics, Physics3D, and PhysFlow [18, 31, 32, 52], distills dy-namic priors from video diffusion models to guide estimation. Along this direc-tion, OmniPhysGS [30] further assigns each Gaussian kernel a constitutive model from a predefined set. Nevertheless, these methods still rely on expert-defined constitutive laws, limiting their ability to capture complex real-world dynam-ics. To reduce this dependency, NeuMA [6] and MASIV [55] optimize neural constitutive models to align simulations with visual observations, though the 4 J. Lin et al. 

learned models are implicit and lack interpretability. VisionLaw [27] further ad-vances this direction by discovering explicit constitutive-law expressions through bilevel optimization. Despite these advances, existing methods typically learn a separate intrinsic dynamics for each scene. 

2.2 Data-Driven World Model 

World models [11, 13, 48] aim to understand and predict environment dynamics, enabling applications such as autonomous driving [46, 54], robotics [42, 43, 47, 51, 57], and VR/AR [58]. Existing approaches broadly fall into three families: SSM-based, JEPA-based, and Transformer-based methods. World Models [11] learns compact latent representations and RNN-based latent dynamics from high-dimensional observations, serving as an early precursor to later RSSM-based world models. Dreamer family [12,14,15] extends this paradigm to model-based reinforcement learning via latent imagination. JEPA [24] learns predictive world representations by predicting embeddings of masked regions rather than reconstructing pixels. I-JEPA [1] and V-JEPA [2] apply this idea to images and videos, respectively, through context-to-masked-block prediction without hand-crafted augmentations. Transformer-based world models [8,36,39] replace recur-rent dynamics with attention-based sequence modeling [45] to better capture long-horizon dependencies. More recently, large-scale generative world simula-tors such as Sora [3] and Genie [4] learn controllable environment dynamics from video, enabling long-horizon generation, while 3D-aware generative world mod-els [22] (e.g., Genie 2, Explorer, LWMs) further couple generative modeling with neural scene representations to construct consistent 3D worlds. Despite their ef-fectiveness, existing world models largely follow a purely data-driven paradigm and lack explicit physical constraints, which often leads to physically inconsistent predictions. In this work, we instead explicitly model world dynamics, moving toward a physics-informed 4D world model. 

## 3 Methodology 

3.1 Problem Setup and Overview 

In this paper, we aim to learn a unified representation that captures the diverse intrinsic dynamics underlying visual observations across multiple scenes, while enabling efficient dynamics inference in novel scenarios. Formally, let KV ⊂ Rdv

denote the domain of video functions, and let C(KV ) be the corresponding space of continuous video functions. In practice, we consider a compact sub-set V ⊂ C (KV ) representing the set of valid video observations that sufficiently capture object motions governed by scene-specific dynamics. We consider a set of N dynamic scenes, each providing calibrated multi-view videos u ∈ V . Let 

C(KC ) be the constitutive function space defined on the constitutive-input do-main KC ⊂ Rdc . Our goal is to learn an operator: 

bG : V → C (KC ) (1) NeuIDO 5……              

> Neural Operator
> Dynamics Latent
> 🔥
> 4D Content
> Neural Operator
> Dynamics Latent
> ❄
> Projector Pretrained Encoder
> ❄🔥
> Reconstructed 3DGS
> Differen2able Simulator
> ......
> 4D Content
> Neural Operator
> Dynamics Latent
> ❄
> Projector Pretrained Encoder
> ❄
> Reconstructed 3DGS
> Differen2able Simulator
> ......
> Data Sampler  𝑧 !𝑧 "𝑧 #
> 4D Content
> Neural Operator
> Dynamics Latent
> Projector Pretrained Encoder
> ❄
> Reconstructed 3DGS
> Differen2able Simulator
> ......
> 🔥
> Adaptor 🔥
> 𝑧 𝑧 𝑧
> 𝐹 𝐹 𝐹
> Strain 𝐹 Stress 𝜎 Stress #𝜎
> Loss
> (Predicted) (Ground Truth)
> forward backward
> 🔥
> Training Stage I: Dynamics Operator Pretraining Training Stage II: Visual-to-Dynamics Alignment Inference Strategy: Zero-Shot Dynamics Inference Inference Strategy: Few-Shot Dynamics AdaptaAon
> Mul2-Scene Video Mul2-View Video Mul2-View Video
> Loss Loss

Fig. 2: Pipeline of NeuIDO. In Stage I, we pretrain the operator on a collection of known constitutive laws to learn a structured representation space of constitutive functions, injecting rich dynamics priors. In Stage II, we train a projector to align visual observations with this representation space, establishing a connection between videos and intrinsic dynamics. Under the zero-shot paradigm, the operator immediately infers plausible intrinsic dynamics for unseen scenes. Under the few-shot paradigm, lightweight adaptation further aligns the operator to out-of-distribution dynamics. 

which maps the video function space to the constitutive function space, such that diverse scene dynamics are embedded into a unified representation. In Sec. 3.2, we formulate a neural intrinsic dynamics operator. In Sec. 3.3, we propose a two-stage training strategy to learn the unified dynamics representation. In Sec. 3.4, we present zero-shot and few-shot inference strategies for generalization to novel scenes. In addition, we provide a theoretical analysis in the Appendix to sup-port the feasibility of our method for modeling world dynamics. The overall architecture of NeuIDO is illustrated in Fig. 2. 

3.2 Unified Intrinsic Dynamics Representation Framework Intrinsic Dynamics Operator Parameterization. We parameterize the mapping bG from observation to dynamics using a neural intrinsic dynamics op-erator. Formally, bG acts on an input video function u to output a continuous constitutive function, bG(u). This function can then be evaluated at any given constitutive input ξ ∈ KC (e.g., deformation gradient F) to yield the specific physical response, bG(u)( ξ). Specifically, inspired by DeepONet [33], NeuIDO is formulated as a branch–trunk operator architecture. The branch network uses a dynamics encoder E to extract z ∈ Rd from the input video, such that z = E(u),capturing the intrinsic dynamics governing the observed motion. This latent rep-resentation is then mapped to the coefficient vector of the operator expansion through a multilayer perceptron (MLP), producing λ ∈ RD . The trunk network parameterizes shared basis functions {ϕk(·)}Dk=1 , and evaluates them at ξ to out-put the vector {ϕk(ξ)}Dk=1 . The video-dependent constitutive function bG(u) is then represented as a linear combination of these basis functions weighted by 6 J. Lin et al. 

the coefficients. 

bG(u)( ξ) = 

> D

X

> k=1

λk ϕk(ξ). (2) Under this formulation, the trunk network learns a shared basis spanning the constitutive function space, while the branch network predicts scene-specific co-efficients that instantiate the constitutive relation for each observation. This de-sign enables NeuIDO to effectively fit the mapping between visual observations and intrinsic dynamics, while exploiting the generalization of neural operators to enable efficient inference in unseen scenarios. 

Trunk Network: Intrinsic Dynamics Basis Representation. The trunk network parameterizes a shared set of constitutive basis functions {ϕk(·)}Dk=1 

across different scenes. For a query point ξ ∈ KC , we evaluate these basis func-tions at ξ to obtain their basis values {ϕk(ξ)}Dk=1 , which are then linearly com-bined with the branch-predicted coefficients in Eq. 2. In differentiable MPM, two types of constitutive relations must be defined: an elastic component that de-scribes the reversible material response under deformation, and a plastic compo-nent that captures irreversible evolution beyond the elastic limit. Accordingly, we parameterize two trunk networks to match these two constitutive mechanisms. (i) Elastic trunk network. The elastic trunk takes the deformation gradient 

F as input and outputs stress basis values {ϕEk (F)}Dk=1 . Given on the visual observation u, the elastic constitutive function bGE (u) is represented as: 

bGE (u)( F) = 

> D

X

> k=1

λEk ϕEk (F). (3) The coefficient vector λE is obtained by mapping the dynamics latent through the elastic MLP head of the branch network. (ii) Plastic trunk network. Similarly, the plastic trunk takes F as input and outputs corrected deformation-gradient basis values {ϕPk (F)}Dk=1 . The scene-specific plastic constitutive function bGP (u) is parameterized in a residual form: 

bGP (u)( F) = F +

> D

X

> k=1

λPk ϕPk (F). (4) The coefficient vector λP is obtained by mapping the same dynamics latent through the plastic MLP head of the branch network. 

Branch Network: Intrinsic Dynamics Latent Identification. The branch network aims to extract scene-dependent dynamics features from visual observa-tions and transform them into coefficient vectors that, together with the trunk network, instantiate the constitutive operators. To this end, we introduce a dy-namics encoder E that maps an input video u ∈ RL×H×W ×3 to a compact NeuIDO 7

dynamics latent z ∈ Rd, which captures the underlying dynamics governing the observed motion. Concretely, E consists of three stages: (i) we compute the opti-cal flow uf ∈ R(L−1) ×H×W ×3 between consecutive frames to emphasize motion cues; (ii) we employ the pretrained optical flow encoder from Tora [53] to embed the flow fields into a spatiotemporal feature representation z0 ∈ R L−14 × H   

> 8×W
> 8×3

,which captures motion patterns across frames; (iii) a projector network maps 

z0 into the compact dynamics latent z. The dynamics latent z is then mapped by two MLP heads to produce elastic and plastic coefficient vectors, λE ∈ RD

and λP ∈ RD , respectively, which are used to weight the corresponding trunk-evaluated bases. 

3.3 Unified Intrinsic Dynamics Representation Learning 

Due to video supervision being sparse and indirect with respect to intrinsic dy-namics, learning the observation-to-dynamics operator in an end-to-end manner is challenging. In contrast, numerous known constitutive relations provide strong supervision covering diverse dynamical mechanisms, offering powerful dynamics priors. To exploit this advantage, we adopt a two-stage training strategy. In Stage I, the operator is pretrained on known constitutive relations to learn a structured representation space of constitutive functions. In Stage II, video observations are aligned with this pretrained space, enabling the operator to infer intrinsic dy-namics consistent with the observed motions. This two-stage design effectively transfers knowledge from strongly supervised constitutive data to weakly super-vised visual observations, facilitating stable learning of the mapping from visual observations to intrinsic dynamics. 

Stage I: Dynamics Operator Pretraining. This stage aims to learn a struc-tured representation space of constitutive functions under strong physical super-vision, so that diverse intrinsic dynamics can be expressed. This representation space is parameterized by a shared trunk basis and indexed by a learnable dy-namics latent. To construct the training data, we collect a large set of known constitutive relations and use the MPM simulator to generate material trajec-tories for each constitutive function. For each trajectory i, we record deforma-tion gradients and their corresponding constitutive responses over particles and timesteps. A total of M trajectories are collected to form the training dataset: 

D =

n F(i)

> p,t

, S(i)

> p,t

, bF(i)

> p,t

o

, p = 1 , . . . , P, t = 1 , . . . , T,  (5) where F is the deformation gradient, S is the elastic stress, and ˆF denotes the plasticity-induced corrected deformation gradient. As visual observations are not yet introduced in this stage, we bypass the dynamics encoder E and instead as-sign each trajectory a learnable dynamics latent z(i). This latent serves as an index to instantiate a specific constitutive function within the shared trunk ba-sis. Concretely, we map z(i) to coefficient vectors λE, (i) and λP, (i) via lightweight elastic and plastic MLP heads, and evaluate the trunk networks on F to form 8 J. Lin et al. 

latent-conditioned constitutive operators. The operator parameters (excluding the dynamics encoder) and the dynamics latents are jointly optimized by mini-mizing reconstruction errors of elastic and plastic responses: 

min   

> θE,θ P,{z(i)}
> M

X

> i=1

X

> p,t



Lr

  bGE (z(i))( F(i)

> p,t

), S(i)

> p,t

 + Lr

  bGP (z(i))( F(i)

> p,t

), bF(i)

> p,t



, (6) where Lr denotes the relative loss [23], and θE and θP represent the parameters of the elastic and plastic trunk networks, respectively. After Stage I, the model captures shared structures across constitutive functions and learns a physically grounded latent space for material dynamics. This pretrained space serves as a strong prior for Stage II, where videos are aligned to it by learning the mapping from visual observations to dynamics latents via the branch video encoder E.

Stage II: Visual-to-Dynamics Alignment. Stage II aligns visual observa-tions with the constitutive representation space learned in Stage I, establishing a connection between videos and intrinsic dynamics. Specifically, we freeze the trunk networks and optimize only the branch-side dynamics encoder E, which maps a video observation u to a dynamics latent z = E(u). Given a training set of N dynamic scenes, where each scene provides multi-view videos capturing object motions governed by intrinsic dynamics, each scene i is treated as one training instance. For each scene, the predicted dynamics latent z(i) instantiates elastic constitutive function bGE (z(i)) and plastic constitutive function bGP (z(i))

within the frozen operator space. These functions are then used to drive a differ-entiable physics-integrated 4D simulation pipeline R (see Appendix for details) to generate rendered videos eV (i) = R( bGE (z(i)), bGP (z(i))) . We supervise the dy-namics encoder E by minimizing the reconstruction error between rendered and observed videos over all scenes: 

min 

> ωN

X

> i=1

Lmse 



R  bGE (z(i)), bGP (z(i)), u(i)

, (7) where ω denotes the parameters of the dynamics encoder E. By optimizing this objective over diverse scenes, the dynamics encoder learns a generalizable mapping from visual motion patterns to the intrinsic-dynamics latents that index the pretrained constitutive representation space. 

3.4 Inference with Unified Intrinsic Dynamics Representation Zero-Shot Dynamics Inference. After the two-stage training, NeuIDO has learned (i) a pretrained constitutive representation space and (ii) a shared dy-namics encoder that maps visual observations to the dynamics latents indexing this space. Therefore, NeuIDO can infer intrinsic dynamics for an unseen scene in a purely feed-forward manner. Given an input video observation u from a new scene, we first extract its dynamics latent using the branch encoder z = E(u).NeuIDO 9

The latent z then instantiates a scene-specific constitutive function within the pretrained operator space, denoted as bGE (z) and bGP (z). We plug these consti-tutive functions into the physics-driven simulation pipeline to roll out the 4D dynamics. Importantly, zero-shot inference requires no additional optimization .This enables efficient constitutive inference and interaction simulation in pre-viously unseen scenes, reflecting the learned cross-scene generalization of the visual-to-dynamics mapping. 

Few-Shot Dynamics Adaptation. While the zero-shot paradigm enables im-mediate dynamics identification in unseen scenes, it may encounter challenges in complex real-world scenarios where the target dynamics significantly deviate from the training distribution. To improve alignment in such cases, we perform a few-shot adaptation mechanism. Instead of updating the entire model, we insert a lightweight adaptor into the trunk network and jointly refine the scene-specific dynamics latent z predicted by the dynamics encoder E. This design enables ef-ficient adaptation while preventing overfitting. Given visual observations u from a scene, we jointly optimize the adaptor parameters θE

> adp

, θP 

> adp

and latent z by minimizing the reconstruction error: 

min 

> θE
> adp ,θ P
> adp ,z

Lmse 



R  bGE (z; θE

> adp

), bGP (z; θP

> adp

), u



, (8) where bG(z; θadp ) denotes the constitutive operator instantiated by latent z with the trunk adaptor applied. This lightweight adaptation enables the model to rapidly specialize to out-of-distribution dynamical environments. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Implementation Details. We follow a DeepONet-style operator [33] parame-terization with a branch–trunk architecture, and set the dynamics latent dimen-sion to 128 (see the Appendix for architectural details). During Training Stage I, each material trajectory is assigned a learnable dynamics latent initialized from 

N (0 , 1) . These latents are jointly optimized together with the trunk network for 10 epochs using a batch size of 10 4. In Training Stage II, each visual scene is treated as one training instance. We freeze the operator and optimize only the projector in the branch network. Training alternates over all N scenes for a total of N × 100 epochs. For few-shot adaptation, we insert LoRA modules [17] into the trunk ( r = 16 , α = 16 ) and jointly optimize the adaptor parameters and the scene-specific latent for 100 epochs. All dynamics rollouts are performed with an MPM simulator in a [0 , 1] 3 domain under gravity ( 9.8m/s 2). We use grid resolutions of 32 3 for synthetic data and 70 3 for real-world data. For each scene, we initialize the simulation by reconstructing a 3DGS representation from the first frame following NeuMA [6], and supervise alignment using 2-view videos 10 J. Lin et al.                                                  

> Method Ball Cat Bottle Duck Pawn Fish Average
> CD ↓ PAC-NeRF [25] 516.300 15.380 2.210 137.730 15.470 1.71 114.80 NCLaw [34] 56.690 2.350 0.920 11.970 3.910 1.300 12.860 NeuMA [6] 1.271 0.679 0.680 3.506 0.882 0.953 1.329 VisionLaw [27] 1.085 0.768 0.639 5.205 0.942 1.078 1.620 Ours(w/o finetune) 1.159 0.844 0.714 5.113 0.973 1.141 1.643 Ours(w/ finetune) 1.356 0.617 0.687 2.850 0.848 0.937 1.216

Table 1: Comparison of chamfer distance on the synthetic dataset. Lower chamfer distance indicates better consistency with ground-truth dynamics. 

for synthetic scenes and 3-view videos for real scenes. All optimization is per-formed using the AdamW optimizer with a cosine learning rate scheduler. All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 (80GB) GPU. 

Datasets and Metrics. For Stage I operator pretraining, we construct a con-stitutive function dataset covering three classical material families: elastic, plas-ticine, and sand. For visual dynamics modeling, we adopt six dynamic scenes from NeuMA [6] as synthetic data. Each scene provides RGB videos from 10 viewpoints with 400 frames per view, along with ground-truth particle trajecto-ries. For real-world evaluation, we use three scenes from Spring-Gaus [56]. Each scene provides RGB videos from three viewpoints with 19 frames per view. To further evaluate zero-shot generalization, we additionally collect 10 scenes with distinct elastic dynamics from PAC-NeRF [25], using eight for training and two for testing. Additional dataset details are reported in the Appendix. To evaluate the consistency between the modeled dynamics and the ground-truth dynamics, we (1) use chamfer distance to measure the distribution discrepancy between simulated and ground-truth particle trajectories, and (2) report PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS to assess visual reconstruction quality. 

4.2 Modeling Observed Intrinsic Dynamics Comparison on Synthetic Datasets. To evaluate intrinsic dynamics mod-eling within the training distribution, we conduct quantitative comparisons on the synthetic dataset. The chamfer distance (CD) results are reported in Tab. 1. Under the zero-shot setting, NeuIDO achieves performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods. Meanwhile, unlike PAC-NeRF, which relies on predefined constitutive models, NCLaw, which requires particle trajectory supervision, and NeuMA and VisionLaw, which perform scene-specific modeling, NeuIDO learns a unified dynamics operator from multi-scene visual observations. We observe that zero-shot inference may exhibit larger errors in scenes with significant dis-tribution shifts from the pretraining data (e.g., JellyDuck). With few-shot adap-tation, the average CD is reduced from 1.643 to 1.216, outperforming all base-lines. Notably, NeuIDO reaches this performance within only 100 adaptation NeuIDO 11 

Fig. 3: Comparison of visual fidelity on the synthetic dataset . We report av-erage PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS between simulated and ground-truth videos on novel views. Higher PSNR/SSIM and lower LPIPS indicate better reconstruction quality. Observation Spring-Gaus Ours NeuMA Observation Spring-Gaus NeuMA              

> Bun Burger
> Observation Spring-Gaus NeuMA
> Pig 30.40 31.57 33.16 33.09 32.99 33.71 34.41 34.89 33.43 34.18 34.94 35.30
> Ours Ours VisionLaw VisionLaw VisionLaw

Fig. 4: Comparison on real-world datasets. Quantitative metrics (i.e., PSNR) between the predicted and observed frames are reported in the bottom row. Our method achieves the best visual dynamics reconstruction. 

iterations, while NeuMA requires around 1000 iterations even when initialized from an NCLaw-pretrained model, demonstrating its ability to efficiently adapt to complex scenes. Fig. 3 further reports PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS on unseen viewpoints. These trends align with the CD results in Tab. 1. Notably, although VisionLaw achieves the lowest CD on the Bottle scene, it does not yield the best visual quality, suggesting that accurate dynamics modeling does not necessarily translate to superior visual reconstruction. 

Comparison on Real-World Datasets. To evaluate real-world dynamics modeling, Fig. 4 compares NeuIDO (with few-shot adaptation) with Spring-Gaus, NeuMA, and VisionLaw on real-world datasets. Spring-Gaus embeds a spring–mass system into 3DGS for elastic modeling, but its limited dynamic ex-pressivity struggles with complex real-world dynamics. NeuMA integrates MPM simulation with neural networks and outperforms Spring-Gaus, though its per-formance heavily relies on an NCLaw-pretrained model. VisionLaw introduces physical inductive biases via LLMs to guide constitutive evolution, yet its op-12 J. Lin et al. x             

> Observa(on
> Time step
> Random Zero-Shot Few-Shot Observation Random Zero-Shot Few-Shot
> PSNR / CD 29.14 / 35.30 32.60 / 1.01 34.66 / 0.54 PSNR / CD 27.46 / 168.40 31.21 / 4.08 32.73 / 0.79

Scene 1 Scene 2 

Fig. 5: Generalization on unseen scenes. Quantitative metrics (PSNR ↑ / CD ↓)and qualitative results for two test scenes. The random baseline uses initialized dynam-ics latents randomly. NeuIDO produces dynamics close to the ground-truth observation in the zero-shot setting and further improves with few-shot adaptation. Different Initial Velocity Different Interactive Scenarios Jelly Honey  Clay  

> Time Time

Fig. 6: Transfer of modeled intrinsic dynamics to new simulation conditions. 

The left text indicates the intrinsic dynamics learned by NeuIDO . Left: Examples with different initial velocities (red arrows denote velocity directions). Right: Interactions with new simulation objects. 

timization is prone to local minima in complex real-world scenes. As shown in Fig. 4, NeuIDO yields reconstructions closer to real observations and achieves the highest PSNR across all real scenes. We attribute this improvement to the unified dynamics representation learned by NeuIDO , which provides strong physical pri-ors for few-shot adaptation, thus enabling more effective alignment to complex real-world dynamics. Together, these results demonstrate that NeuIDO effec-tively captures intrinsic dynamics in real-world scenarios, providing a practical pathway toward physics-informed world models and a stronger foundation for dynamics understanding in embodied agents interacting with real environments. NeuIDO 13 Time step Stiff Elas.c Component Plas.c Component   

> (a) (b)
> Fig. 7: Representation analysis. (a) t-SNE visualization of Stage-I pretrained dy-namics latents of 90 material trajectories. (b) 4D rollouts generated by interpolating between two dynamics latents. Top markers indicate the interpolation settings, show-ing a smooth transition from soft to stiff behavior.

4.3 Generalization Analysis Generalization to Unseen Scenarios. While the previous experiments eval-uate intrinsic dynamics modeling within the training distribution, we further examine whether NeuIDO can infer dynamics in completely unseen scenes. Fol-lowing PAC-NeRF, we select 10 scenes with diverse elastic behaviors, using eight for training and two as unseen test scenes. As shown in Fig. 5, NeuIDO achieves strong zero-shot performance on the unseen scenes, significantly outperforming the random baseline in both qualitative results and quantitative metrics (PSNR / CD). Importantly, NeuIDO correctly distinguishes different physical behaviors purely from visual observations without any optimization. For example, Scene 1 exhibits softer deformation patterns, while Scene 2 shows a noticeably more rigid response. These results suggest that the model does not simply memorize the appearance of training scenes, but instead learns a transferable mapping from vi-sual observations to intrinsic dynamics. Overall, NeuIDO generalizes beyond the training distribution and enables immediate dynamics inference in unseen envi-ronments, providing a promising foundation for physics-informed world modeling to support embodied decision-making in novel environments. 

Generalization to Different Simulation Conditions. We further evaluate whether the learned intrinsic dynamics can generalize across different simulation conditions. To this end, we transfer the modeled dynamics to 4D interaction tasks following the interaction paradigms of PhysGaussian and Phy124, while modi-fying the simulation setup, including the initial velocity and interacting objects. As shown in Fig. 6, the resulting dynamics remain consistent with the original observations despite changes in simulation conditions. For example, when an ini-tial velocity toward the lower-right direction is applied, JellyDuck still exhibits clear elastic deformation and recovery behavior. Similarly, when clay dynam-ics are applied to Hamburger, the object reproduces the slow settling behavior characteristic of clay materials. These results suggest that NeuIDO learns scene-independent intrinsic dynamics that generalize across simulation conditions. 14 J. Lin et al.                                      

> Dim Pretraining Alignment Elasticity Plasticity Ball Cat Bottle Duck Pawn Fish Average
> 32 1.023e3 3.598e-8 3.721% -33.850% -12.497% -0.052% -2.108% -13.289% -9.679% 64 8.392e2 3.211e-8 -7.361% -29.942% -9.340% -0.046% 3.240% -14.247% -9.616% 256 6.885e2 3.341e-8 -3.229% 4.631% 6.397% -1.573% -0.890% 3.418% 1.459%

Table 2: Analysis of impact of dynamics latent dimensionality on operator expressiveness. We report the MSE loss in Stage I (pretraining) and the relative change in chamfer distance with respect to the 128-dimensional in Stage II (alignment). 10-View                 

> ClayCat 0.830 0.768 RubberPawn 0.973 0.984 Observation 1-View 4-View
> BouncyBall 1.617 1.185 Time
> 1.145 0.778 1.027 10-View Observation 1-View 4-View 10-View Observation 1-View 4-View

Fig. 8: Effect of multi-view supervision. Comparisons using 1, 4, and 10 input views during Stage II alignment. Chamfer distances are shown in the bottom row. 

4.4 Representation Analysis 

To examine whether NeuIDO learns a structured intrinsic dynamics representa-tion, we visualize the Stage-I pretrained dynamics latents of 90 material trajec-tories using t-SNE and analyze their interpolation behavior. As shown in Fig. 7 (a), the latents from the same constitutive family are clustered together, while different constitutive families are clearly separated. We further evaluate the con-tinuity of this representation by interpolating between two dynamics latents and rolling out the corresponding 4D dynamics. Fig. 7 (b) reveals a smooth transi-tion from soft to stiff motion along the interpolation. These results show that the learned latent space is discriminative across constitutive families and continuous within the dynamics manifold, supporting NeuIDO ’s zero-shot inference. 

4.5 Ablation Study Effect of Latent Dimensionality. We study the impact of dynamics latent dimensionality on operator expressiveness by evaluating different latent sizes. Specifically, we report the MSE loss in Stage I (pretraining) and relative change in chamfer distance with respect to the 128-dimensional default in Stage II (align-ment). As shown in Tab. 2, in the pretraining phase, smaller latent dimensions (e.g., 32) result in significantly higher fitting errors, indicating insufficient ca-pacity to index diverse constitutive functions. Increasing the latent dimension NeuIDO 15 

to 64 and 256 substantially reduces the error. A similar trend is observed in the alignment phase. The 32-dimensional setting degrades performance across several scenes, whereas the 256-dimensional latent achieves the best or near-best results in most cases. These results suggest that latent dimensionality directly affects the expressive capacity of the operator: higher-dimensional latents allow the model to capture more complex dynamics and improve fitting accuracy. 

Effect of Multi-View Supervision. We analyze the impact of multi-view su-pervision by training the operator with 1, 4, and 10 input views during Stage II alignment (Fig. 8). Increasing supervision from a single view to multiple views significantly improves dynamics reconstruction, as additional viewpoints help reduce geometric ambiguity and incomplete observations. However, increasing the number of views from 4 to 10 provides only marginal improvement, indi-cating diminishing returns from additional visual supervision. A similar trend is observed in the few-shot multi-view ablation reported in the Appendix. These results suggest that simply increasing the number of views does not continu-ously improve intrinsic dynamics modeling. Since intrinsic dynamics are inferred indirectly through image-space reconstruction, rendering errors may accumu-late. Therefore, further improvements in dynamics reconstruction likely require stronger physical constraints rather than additional visual observations. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce NeuIDO , a world dynamics modeling framework that learns a unified representation of intrinsic dynamics from visual observa-tions across scenes. By formulating world modeling as a neural operator learning problem, NeuIDO establishes a mapping from the observation space to the con-stitutive function space, enabling diverse scene dynamics to be captured within a shared representation. To make this feasible, we introduce a two-stage train-ing strategy: (i) pretraining a structured representation space of constitutive functions from a collection of known constitutive relations, and (ii) aligning vi-sual observations with this learned space to establish the observation–dynamics link. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that 

NeuIDO effectively models cross-scene dynamics, enabling real-time zero-shot dynamics inference and efficient few-shot adaptation in unseen scenes. These re-sults highlight the potential of NeuIDO as a step toward physics-informed world models for embodied planning and decision-making. 

## Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Break-through Plan of the Ministry of Education of China, the Shanghai Committee of Science and Technology, China (Grant No.24511103200), Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, XPLORER PRIZE grants. We sincerely thank Jikuang Zhang for his valuable contributions to this work. 16 J. Lin et al. 

## References 

1. Assran, M., Duval, Q., Misra, I., Bojanowski, P., Vincent, P., Rabbat, M., LeCun, Y., Ballas, N.: Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predic-tive architecture. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 15619–15629 (2023) 2. Bardes, A., Garrido, Q., Ponce, J., Chen, X., Rabbat, M., LeCun, Y., Assran, M., Ballas, N.: Revisiting feature prediction for learning visual representations from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08471 (2024) 3. Brooks, T., Peebles, B., Holmes, C., DePue, W., Guo, Y., Jing, L., Schnurr, D., Taylor, J., Luhman, T., Luhman, E., et al.: Video generation models as world simulators. OpenAI Blog 1(8), 1 (2024) 4. Bruce, J., Dennis, M.D., Edwards, A., Parker-Holder, J., Shi, Y., Hughes, E., Lai, M., Mavalankar, A., Steigerwald, R., Apps, C., et al.: Genie: Generative interactive environments. In: Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning (2024) 5. Cai, J., Yang, Y., Yuan, W., He, Y., Dong, Z., Bo, L., Cheng, H., Chen, Q.: Gic: Gaussian-informed continuum for physical property identification and simulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 75035–75063 (2024) 6. Cao, J., Guan, S., Ge, Y., Li, W., Yang, X., Ma, C.: Neuma: Neural material adaptor for visual grounding of intrinsic dynamics. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 , 65643–65669 (2024) 7. Chaves, E.W.: Notes on continuum mechanics. Springer Science & Business Media (2013) 8. Chen, C., Wu, Y.F., Yoon, J., Ahn, S.: Transdreamer: Reinforcement learning with transformer world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.09481 (2022) 9. Feng, T., Wang, X., Jiang, Y.G., Zhu, W.: Embodied ai: From llms to world models [feature]. IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine 25 (4), 14–37 (2025) 10. Feng, Y., Shang, Y., Li, X., Shao, T., Jiang, C., Yang, Y.: Pie-nerf: Physics-based interactive elastodynamics with nerf. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4450–4461 (2024) 11. Ha, D., Schmidhuber, J.: Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018) 12. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J., Norouzi, M.: Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603 (2019) 13. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Fischer, I., Villegas, R., Ha, D., Lee, H., Davidson, J.: Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In: International conference on machine learning. pp. 2555–2565. PMLR (2019) 14. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Norouzi, M., Ba, J.: Mastering atari with discrete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193 (2020) 15. Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., Lillicrap, T.: Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 (2023) 16. Hu, A., Russell, L., Yeo, H., Murez, Z., Fedoseev, G., Kendall, A., Shotton, J., Corrado, G.: Gaia-1: A generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.17080 (2023) 17. Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W.: Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 (2021) 18. Huang, T., Zhang, H., Zeng, Y., Zhang, Z., Li, H., Zuo, W., Lau, R.W.: Dream-physics: Learning physics-based 3d dynamics with video diffusion priors. In: Pro-ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 39, pp. 3733–3741 (2025) NeuIDO 17 19. Jiang, Y., Yu, C., Xie, T., Li, X., Feng, Y., Wang, H., Li, M., Lau, H., Gao, F., Yang, Y., et al.: Vr-gs: A physical dynamics-aware interactive gaussian splatting system in virtual reality. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH. pp. 1–1 (2024) 20. Kang, B., Yue, Y., Lu, R., Lin, Z., Zhao, Y., Wang, K., Huang, G., Feng, J.: How far is video generation from world model: A physical law perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.02385 (2024) 21. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42 (4), 139–1 (2023) 22. Kong, L., Yang, W., Mei, J., Liu, Y., Liang, A., Zhu, D., Lu, D., Yin, W., Hu, X., Jia, M., et al.: 3d and 4d world modeling: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07996 (2025) 23. Kossaifi, J., Kovachki, N., Li, Z., Pitt, D., Liu-Schiaffini, M., Duruisseaux, V., George, R.J., Bonev, B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Berner, J., et al.: A library for learn-ing neural operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10354 (2024) 24. LeCun, Y., et al.: A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review 62 (1), 1–62 (2022) 25. Li, X., Qiao, Y.L., Chen, P.Y., Jatavallabhula, K.M., Lin, M., Jiang, C., Gan, C.: Pac-nerf: Physics augmented continuum neural radiance fields for geometry-agnostic system identification. In: Proceedings of the International conference on learning representations (2023) 26. Li, Z., Yu, H.X., Liu, W., Yang, Y., Herrmann, C., Wetzstein, G., Wu, J.: Wonder-play: Dynamic 3d scene generation from a single image and actions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 9080–9090 (2025) 27. Lin, J., Jiang, S., Zeng, Q., Wang, Z., Jiang, M.: Visionlaw: Inferring interpretable intrinsic dynamics from visual observations via bilevel optimization. In: Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations. vol. 2026, pp. 96128–96165 (2026) 28. Lin, J., Wang, Z., Hou, Y., Tang, Y., Jiang, M.: Phy124: Fast physics-driven 4d content generation from a single image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07179 (2024) 29. Lin, J., Wang, Z., Xu, D., Jiang, S., Gong, Y., Jiang, M.: Phys4dgen: Physics-compliant 4d generation with multi-material composition perception. In: Proceed-ings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia. pp. 10398–10407 (2025) 30. Lin, Y., Lin, C., Xu, J., Mu, Y.: Omniphysgs: 3d constitutive gaussians for gen-eral physics-based dynamics generation. In: International Conference on Learning Representations. vol. 2025, pp. 70160–70187 (2025) 31. Liu, F., Wang, H., Yao, S., Zhang, S., Zhou, J., Duan, Y.: Physics3d: Learning phys-ical properties of 3d gaussians via video diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04338 (2024) 32. Liu, Z., Ye, W., Luximon, Y., Wan, P., Zhang, D.: Unleashing the potential of multi-modal foundation models and video diffusion for 4d dynamic physical scene simulation. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con-ference. pp. 11016–11025 (2025) 33. Lu, L., Jin, P., Karniadakis, G.E.: Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03193 (2019) 34. Ma, P., Chen, P.Y., Deng, B., Tenenbaum, J.B., Du, T., Gan, C., Matusik, W.: Learning neural constitutive laws from motion observations for generalizable pde dynamics. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning. pp. 23279–23300. PMLR (2023) 18 J. Lin et al. 35. Macklin, M., Müller, M., Chentanez, N.: Xpbd: position-based simulation of com-pliant constrained dynamics. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Motion in Games. pp. 49–54 (2016) 36. Micheli, V., Alonso, E., Fleuret, F.: Transformers are sample-efficient world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588 (2022) 37. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Commu-nications of the ACM 65 (1), 99–106 (2021) 38. Müller, M., Heidelberger, B., Hennix, M., Ratcliff, J.: Position based dynamics. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representationv (JVCI) 18 (2), 109– 118 (2007) 39. Robine, J., Höftmann, M., Uelwer, T., Harmeling, S.: Transformer-based world models are happy with 100k interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07109 (2023) 40. Russell, L., Hu, A., Bertoni, L., Fedoseev, G., Shotton, J., Arani, E., Corrado, G.: Gaia-2: A controllable multi-view generative world model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20523 (2025) 41. Stomakhin, A., Schroeder, C., Chai, L., Teran, J., Selle, A.: A material point method for snow simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 32 (4), 1–10 (2013) 42. Sun, J., Li, Y., Wei, J., Xu, L., Wang, N., Zhang, Y., Lu, C.: Arti-pg: A tool-box for procedurally synthesizing large-scale and diverse articulated objects with rich annotations. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 6396–6405 (2025) 43. Sun, J., Li, Y., Xu, L., Wei, J., Chai, L., Lu, C.: Discovering conceptual knowledge with analytic ontology templates for articulated objects. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 39, pp. 14681–14689 (2025) 44. Sun, J., Lu, C.: Digital gene: Learning about the physical world through analytic concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04170 (2025) 45. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems 30 (2017) 46. Wang, X., Zhu, Z., Huang, G., Chen, X., Zhu, J., Lu, J.: Drivedreamer: Towards real-world-drive world models for autonomous driving. In: European conference on computer vision. pp. 55–72. Springer (2024) 47. Wei, J., Li, Y., Lu, C., Sun, J.: Physically ground commonsense knowledge for articulated object manipulation with analytic concepts. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 13519– 13528 (2026) 48. Wu, P., Escontrela, A., Hafner, D., Abbeel, P., Goldberg, K.: Daydreamer: World models for physical robot learning. In: Conference on robot learning. pp. 2226– 2240. PMLR (2023) 49. Wu, Z., Xu, H., Xu, G., Nie, P., Yan, Z., Zheng, J., Qu, L., Li, M., Nie, L.: Textsplat: Text-guided semantic fusion for generalizable gaussian splatting. In: Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia. pp. 8478–8487 (2025) 50. Xie, T., Zong, Z., Qiu, Y., Li, X., Feng, Y., Yang, Y., Jiang, C.: Physgaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynamics. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4389– 4398 (2024) 51. Yang, M., Du, Y., Ghasemipour, K., Tompson, J., Schuurmans, D., Abbeel, P.: Learning interactive real-world simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06114 1(2), 6 (2023) NeuIDO 19 52. Zhang, T., Yu, H.X., Wu, R., Feng, B.Y., Zheng, C., Snavely, N., Wu, J., Freeman, W.T.: Physdreamer: Physics-based interaction with 3d objects via video genera-tion. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 388–406. Springer (2024) 53. Zhang, Z., Liao, J., Li, M., Dai, Z., Qiu, B., Zhu, S., Qin, L., Wang, W.: Tora: Trajectory-oriented diffusion transformer for video generation. In: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference. pp. 2063–2073 (2025) 54. Zhao, G., Wang, X., Zhu, Z., Chen, X., Huang, G., Bao, X., Wang, X.: Drivedreamer-2: Llm-enhanced world models for diverse driving video generation. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 39, pp. 10412–10420 (2025) 55. Zhao, Y., Chen, H., Liu, C., Li, Z., Herrmann, C., Hur, J., Li, Y., Yang, M.H., Raj, B., Xu, M.: Toward material-agnostic system identification from videos. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 5944–5956 (2025) 56. Zhong, L., Yu, H.X., Wu, J., Li, Y.: Reconstruction and simulation of elastic objects with spring-mass 3d gaussians. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 407–423. Springer (2024) 57. Zhou, S., Du, Y., Chen, J., Li, Y., Yeung, D.Y., Gan, C.: Robodreamer: Learning compositional world models for robot imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12377 (2024) 58. Zhu, Z., Wang, X., Zhao, W., Min, C., Li, B., Deng, N., Dou, M., Wang, Y., Shi, B., Wang, K., et al.: Is sora a world simulator? a comprehensive survey on general world models and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03520 (2024) 20 J. Lin et al. 

## Appendix A Overview 

In this appendix, we will provide: i) more experimental details; ii) more exper-imental results; iii) physics-informed 4D generation pipeline; iv) limitation and future work; v) universal approximation theorem of the neural intrinsic dynamics operator. 

## B More Experimental Details 

B.1 Dataset Details 

For Stage I operator pretraining, we construct a constitutive function dataset covering three classical material families: elastic, plasticine, and sand (their con-stitutive formulations are provided in B.2). For each material, we randomly sam-ple 30 sets of material parameters, resulting in 30 distinct material instances. For each instance, we run an MPM simulation under a unified physical setup in which a cubic object evolves under gravity. Each simulation produces one trajec-tory that records the temporal evolution of stress and deformation gradient. In total, the dataset contains 3 × 30 trajectories. For visual dynamics modeling, we adopt six dynamic scenes from NeuMA [6] as synthetic data. The dataset covers diverse material types ranging from elastic solids to granular materials and multi-ple object geometries. Each scene provides RGB videos from 10 viewpoints with 400 frames per view, along with ground-truth particle trajectories. To reduce computational overhead, we temporally downsample the videos by retaining one frame out of every five, resulting in 80 frames per view for training. For real-world evaluation, we collect three real-world scenes from Spring-Gaus [56]. Each scene provides RGB videos from three viewpoints with 19 frames per view. To evaluate zero-shot dynamics inference on unseen scenes, we further collect 10 elastic material scenes with distinct dynamics from the PAC-NeRF [25]. Each scene contains videos from 10 viewpoints with 14 frames per view. We use eight scenes for training and two scenes for testing to assess zero-shot generalization. In all experiments, the initial velocity is assumed to be known. 

B.2 Classical Material Models 

In this work, we use three classical materials, elastic , plasticine , and sand , to generate the Stage-I training dataset. Following the standard constitutive for-mulation within MPM framework, the behavior of each material is determined by an elastic constitutive law together with a plasticity constitutive law. 

Elastic Material The dynamics of the elastic material are defined by Fixed Corotated Elasticity together with Identity Plasticity , i.e., purely elastic defor-mation without permanent plastic flow. NeuIDO 21 

Fixed Corotated Elasticity. The Kirchhoff stress is defined as 

τ = 2 μ (F − R) FT + λJ (J − 1) I, (9) where 

F = UΣVT , R = UV T , (10) are given by the singular value decomposition of the deformation gradient F,and J = det( F).

Identity Plasticity. The corrected deformation gradient is simply 

Fcorrected = F. (11) 

Plasticine Material The dynamics of plasticine are modeled by Sigma Elas-ticity together with Von Mises Plasticity . This combination captures elastic response under small deformation and irreversible plastic flow once the yield criterion is exceeded. 

Sigma Elasticity. The Kirchhoff stress is defined as 

τ = U diag(2 μ log( σ) + λ tr(log( σ)) 1) UT , (12) where 

F = UΣVT , Σ = diag( σ). (13) 

Von Mises Plasticity. The corrected deformation gradient is defined as 

Fcorrected = U Z(Σ) VT , (14) where 

Z(Σ) = 



Σ, δγ ≤ 0,

exp 



ϵ − δγ ˆϵ

> ∥ˆϵ∥



, otherwise , (15) and 

ϵ = log( Σ), ˆϵ = dev( ϵ), δγ = ∥ˆϵ∥ − τY

2μ . (16) Here, τY denotes the yield stress. Von Mises plasticity is widely used for materials exhibiting isotropic yielding, such as clay-like or metal-like plastic behavior. 

Sand Material The dynamics of sand are modeled by Sigma Elasticity to-gether with Drucker–Prager Plasticity . Compared with Von Mises plasticity, the Drucker–Prager model additionally accounts for pressure-dependent yielding, which is important for granular materials such as sand. 

Sigma Elasticity. Sand material adopts the same elastic constitutive law as the plasticine material described in Eq. 12. 22 J. Lin et al. Progress Update        

> 3D VAE Encoder
> T,H,W,C T/4,H/8, W/8,4 “Flatten”
> t,h,w,4 thw,d MLP thw,d
> Attention Pooling MLP
> d
> 𝒛 𝐹 MLP MLP

…….   

> D
> 𝐷 × 9 𝜙 !
> Branch Network
> ......
> Visual Observation 𝒖
> 𝑡 !
> 𝑡 "
> Projector
> Elastic MLP Plastic MLP
> 𝝀 #
> 𝝀 $
> DD
> “Dot Product”
> 3D Conv
> Elastic Trunk Network Plastic Trunk Network
> MLP MLP

……. 

> 𝐹
> 𝜙 "
> “Dot Product”
> 𝒢 $(𝒖)(𝑭) 𝒢 #(𝒖)(𝑭)
> Continuum Representation
> 𝐷 × 9

Fig. 9: Model Architecture. The branch network encodes an input video into a dynamics latent z using a 3D VAE encoder, 3D convolution, and an attention-based projector. The latent is mapped to coefficient vectors for elastic and plastic components. Two trunk networks take the deformation gradient F as input and output basis values. The final constitutive responses are obtained through dot-product interactions between the branch coefficients and trunk basis values. 

Drucker–Prager Plasticity. Given 

F = UΣVT , ϵ = log( Σ), ˆϵ = dev( ϵ), (17) the corrected deformation gradient is defined as 

Fcorrected = U Z(Σ) VT , (18) with 

Z(Σ) = 



I, if tr( ϵ) > 0,

Σ, if δγ ≤ 0 and tr( ϵ) ≤ 0,

exp 



ϵ − δγ ˆϵ

> ∥ˆϵ∥



, otherwise ,

(19) where 

δγ = ∥ˆϵ∥ + α (dλ + 2 μ) tr( ϵ)2μ , α =

r 23 · 2 sin ϕf

3 − sin ϕf

. (20) Here, ϕf is the friction angle. 

B.3 Model Architecture Details 

We provide additional implementation details of the proposed NeuIDO architec-ture. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the architecture follows a branch–trunk neural op-erator design, where the branch network extracts coefficient vectors from visual observations and the trunk networks parameterize constitutive basis functions. 

Branch Network. The branch network maps an input video observation 

u ∈ RT ×H×W ×C to a compact dynamics latent z ∈ RD . The video is first pro-cessed by a pretrained 3D VAE encoder from Tora [53] to obtain a spatiotempo-ral feature volume. A 3D convolution layer is then applied to further aggregate NeuIDO 23 

motion patterns. The resulting features are flattened along the spatiotemporal dimensions and passed through a projector composed of an MLP, an attention pooling module, and a final MLP. The attention pooling layer aggregates spa-tiotemporal tokens into a global feature representation, which is then projected to the dynamics latent z. To instantiate scene-specific constitutive functions, the latent z is further mapped by two independent MLP heads to produce the coef-ficient vectors λE ∈ RD and λP ∈ RD corresponding to the elastic and plastic components, respectively. 

Trunk Networks. NeuIDO employs two trunk networks with identical ar-chitectures but separate parameters for elastic and plastic modeling. Each trunk is implemented as a three-layer MLP that maps the deformation gradient F to a D × 9-dimensional set of basis values, denoted as ϕE (F) and ϕP (F). Each basis output is 9-dimensional because the constitutive responses (stress tensor or corrected deformation gradient) are represented as 3 × 3 matrices, which are vectorized into a 9-dimensional form. 

Operator Instantiation. The final constitutive functions are obtained by dot-product interactions between the branch-predicted coefficients and the trunk-evaluated basis values. Specifically, the elastic response is computed from λE and 

ϕE (F), while the plastic response is computed from λP and ϕP (F). In this for-mulation, the branch network produces scene-dependent coefficients, whereas the trunk networks provide a shared basis representation of constitutive functions. 

B.4 Baselines 

NeuIDO is the first method to learn a unified representation of intrinsic dy-namics directly from visual observations. Consequently, we conduct a best-effort comparison with several representative approaches that address related prob-lems from different perspectives. All baselines are implemented following their original settings. 

– PAC-NeRF [25] estimates material parameters from visual observations. However, its reliance on manually specified constitutive models limits its ability to capture complex real-world dynamics. 

– NCLaw [34] learns neural constitutive models from pre-defined particle tra-jectory rather than visual observations and is typically used as a neural constitutive prior. 

– NeuMA [6] extends NCLaw by introducing a neural adaptor that aligns neu-ral constitutive models with visual observations. Although this enables visual grounding of dynamics, NeuMA performs scene-specific modeling and does not learn a unified intrinsic dynamics representation across scenes. Among existing approaches, NeuMA is therefore the closest to our work. 

– VisionLaw [27] leverages large language models to introduce strong physical inductive biases for guiding the search of constitutive expressions, effectively alleviating NeuMA’s overfitting under 1-view observations. However, its per-formance heavily relies on the LLM-driven search for constitutive structures, which is complex and stochastic rather than driven by visual-supervision 24 J. Lin et al.   

> Fig. 10: Comparison of Chamfer Distance across different time steps on the synthetic dataset. NeuIDO achieves competitive performance under the zero-shot setting and further improves after few-shot adaptation, obtaining the best overall accuracy and stability in most scenarios.

optimization. Consequently, in our 2-view experiments, VisionLaw achieves performance similar to its single-view setting. 

– Spring-Gaus [56] integrates a mass–spring system into a 3D Gaussian Splat-ting representation to model elastic dynamics. However, its expressiveness is limited to relatively simple elastic behaviors, making it difficult to capture complex real-world dynamics. In this work, we compare with Spring-Gaus on real-world datasets. 

## C More Experimental Results 

C.1 Quantitative Comparison of Chamfer Distance 

To provide a finer-grained analysis of intrinsic dynamics modeling, we compare the chamfer distance of different methods across time steps and scenes, as shown in Fig. 10. Unlike reporting only averaged chamfer distance metrics, this evalua-tion reveals whether a model can consistently track object evolution throughout the entire dynamic process. Overall, NeuIDO exhibits lower and more stable error curves in most scenarios. Under the zero-shot setting, NeuIDO already achieves performance comparable to existing state-of-the-art methods, indicating its abil-ity to learn a unified representation of intrinsic dynamics across multiple scenes. After few-shot adaptation, the error is further reduced, leading to the best per-formance in the majority of cases. Moreover, in scenarios with stronger temporal fluctuations, NeuIDO effectively suppresses error peaks and maintains more sta-ble long-horizon predictions. These results demonstrate that NeuIDO achieves NeuIDO 25 10-View                 

> ClayCat 0.776 0.659 RubberPawn 0.867 0.864
> Observation 1-View 4-View
> JellyDuck 13.741 2.821
> Time 2.883 0.690 0.946 10-View Observation 1-View 4-View 10-View Observation 1-View 4-View

Fig. 11: Effect of the number of supervision views in few-shot adaptation .Comparisons using 1, 4, and 10 input views during few-shot adaptation. Chamfer distances are shown in the bottom row. Increasing the number of views improves adaptation quality by alleviating geometric ambiguity, while the improvement becomes marginal once sufficient coverage is reached. 

View Bun Burger Dog Pig 

View-0 33.777 34.140 30.872 33.853 View-1 32.916 33.144 30.806 32.627 View-2 32.703 34.244 31.678 34.048 All 34.944 34.186 34.959 35.295 

Table 3: Monocular-video supervision on the real-world dataset. 

both high prediction accuracy and temporal stability while learning a unified representation of intrinsic dynamics. 

C.2 Effect of Multi-view Supervision in Few-shot Adaptation 

We study the effect of the number of supervision views in the few-shot adapta-tion stage in Fig. 11. The trend closely matches the multi-view ablation in Stage II reported in the main paper. Single-view supervision performs the worst across all scenes, due to incomplete observations and geometric ambiguity. Increasing the number of views substantially improves the results. In contrast, the gain from 4 to 10 views is limited. This suggests that beyond a certain point, additional views do not provide sufficiently richer supervision to further improve adapta-tion. One possible reason is that visual supervision is intrinsically indirect: the dynamics of a 3D object must first be rendered onto the 2D image plane, and the optimization signal is then derived from image-space reconstruction errors. This projection from dynamic 3D states to 2D observations inevitably discards substantial geometric and temporal information, which limits the additional ben-efit of increasing the number of views beyond a certain point. This observation motivates future efforts toward converting visual observations into denser and more direct signals for dynamics learning. Balancing performance and computa-tional cost, we use 2 views as the default setting. We further evaluate NeuIDO 26 J. Lin et al. 

Metric Ball Cat Pawn Fish 

Min 1.235 0.607 0.848 0.923 Max 1.304 0.626 0.862 0.961 Mean 1.277 0.616 0.856 0.941 Variance 5.228e-2 7.496e-3 5.033e-3 1.229e-2 

Table 4: Few-shot adaptation stability analysis. We report the minimum, max-imum, mean, and variance of chamfer distance over five random seeds for each scene. Observation Spring-Gaus Ours NeuMA          

> Dog 32.30 33.72 34.96
> (a)
> Observation Mean Zero-Shot Few-Shot
> PSNR / CD 30.19 / 2.55 31.99/ 0.70 32.81 / 0.59
> (b)

Fig. 12: Broader Evaluation. (a) Additional real-world result for observed intrinsic dynamics modeling. (b) Additional unseen-scene generalization results. 

under monocular-video supervision on the real-world dataset, using each of the three views independently. As shown in Tab. 3, monocular supervision generally lowers performance, with failures in challenging cases such as ’Dog’, as a single view provides limited 3D deformation cues and makes dynamics identification ambiguous. Scenes such as “Pig” remain close to multi-view performance when dominant deformations are visible in the input view. 

C.3 Few-shot Adaptation Stability Analysis 

We further evaluate the stability of few-shot adaptation by running NeuIDO 

with five random seeds. As shown in Tab. 4, the adapted results exhibit small variations across seeds on all scenes, indicating that the few-shot adaptation process is stable and not sensitive to random initialization. This suggests that the pretrained dynamics representation provides a reliable prior for efficient scene-specific adaptation. 

C.4 Broader Evaluation 

We further provide broader evaluation results. Specifically, we add one real-world scene for observed intrinsic dynamics modeling (Sec. 4.2) and five additional scenes for unseen-scenario generalization (Sec. 4.3). As shown in Fig. 12 (a), 

NeuIDO achieves better reconstruction quality than Spring-Gaus and NeuMA on the additional real-world scene, further validating its ability to model observed NeuIDO 27 

intrinsic dynamics. Fig. 12 (b) shows that NeuIDO also generalizes well to unseen scenes: zero-shot inference already produces dynamics closer to the observations than the mean baseline, and few-shot adaptation further improves both PSNR and chamfer distance. These results are consistent with the trends reported in Sec. 4.2 and Sec. 4.3. 

## D Physics-Informed 4D Generation Pipeline 

Physics-informed 4D generation aims to model dynamic scenes by coupling phys-ical simulation with differentiable visual representations. In this framework, ma-terial dynamics are governed by continuum mechanics, simulated using a nu-merical solver, and rendered through a differentiable scene representation that enables supervision from visual observations. 

D.1 Continuum Mechanics and Constitutive Laws 

In continuum mechanics [7], the motion and deformation of materials are gov-erned by the conservation of mass and momentum: 

Dρ Dt + ρ∇ · v = 0 , ρ Dv

Dt = ∇ · P + ρg, (21) where ρ denotes the density, v the velocity field, g the gravitational acceleration, and P the stress tensor. The stress tensor is determined by the material constitu-tive law, which describes how a material responds to deformation. Therefore, the governing system becomes solvable only after specifying a constitutive relation for P.Within the MPM framework, two types of constitutive laws are typically required: (i) an elastic constitutive law that models reversible elastic responses, and (ii) a plastic constitutive law that captures irreversible plastic deformation. These relations can be written as 

φE (F; θE ) 7 → τ , φP (F; θP ) 7 → Fcorrected , (22) where φE and φP denote the elastic and plastic constitutive laws, respectively. F

denotes the deformation gradient, τ is the Kirchhoff stress tensor, and Fcorrected 

represents the deformation gradient after plastic return mapping. The parame-ters θE and θP represent material-specific properties. Although many classical constitutive laws have been proposed, they often struggle to capture the diversity and nonlinear behaviors of complex real-world materials. 

D.2 Material Point Method 

To simulate the above continuum equations, we adopt the Material Point Method (MPM) [41], a hybrid simulation approach that combines Lagrangian particles with an Eulerian grid. MPM discretizes the material into particles that carry 28 J. Lin et al. 

physical quantities such as mass, velocity, and deformation gradients, while grid nodes are used to compute intermediate physical interactions. Each particle p

stores a set of physical attributes, including mass m, density ρ, volume V , ve-locity v, deformation gradient F, and velocity gradient C. At each simulation step, MPM performs three stages: particle-to-grid (P2G) transfer, grid update, and grid-to-particle (G2P) transfer. During the P2G stage, particle momentum and mass are transferred to grid nodes: 

mt+1  

> i

= X

> p

wip mp, (23) 

(mv)t+1  

> i

= X

> p

wip 

mpvtp + mpCtp(xi − xtp) , (24) where wip is the B-spline kernel weight between particle p and grid node i. Grid nodes then update their velocities by solving the momentum equation: 

vti = ( mvi)t/m ti, (25) 

f ti,in = − X

> p

τ tp∇wip Vp, (26) 

vt+1  

> i

= vti + ∆t (fi,in /m i + g) . (27) Finally, updated grid quantities are interpolated back to particles: 

vt+1  

> p

= X

> i

wip vt+1  

> i

, (28) 

xt+1  

> p

= xtp + ∆t vt+1  

> p

, (29) 

Ct+1  

> p

= 4

∆x 2

X

> i

wip vt+1  

> i

(xi − xtp)T . (30) The deformation gradient is then updated as 

Ftr p = ( I + ∆t Ct+1  

> p

)Ftp, (31) 

Ft+1  

> p

= φP (Ftr p ), (32) 

τ t+1  

> p

= φE (Ft+1  

> p

), (33) where φE and φP denote the elastic and plastic constitutive laws, respectively. Through these steps, MPM advances the physical state of the system over time. 

D.3 Physics-Integrated 3D Gaussian Representation 

To connect physical simulation with visual observations, we adopt the 3D Gaus-sian Splatting (3DGS) representation [21]. 3DGS represents a scene using a set of anisotropic Gaussian kernels 

S = {xi, Ai, α i, Ci}i∈K ,NeuIDO 29 

where xi, Ai, αi, and Ci denote the center position, covariance matrix, opacity, and spherical harmonic coefficients of each Gaussian kernel. Given a camera view, the color of a pixel is computed through alpha compositing: 

C = X

> i∈N

σiSH (di, Ci)

> i−1

Y

> j=1

(1 − σj ), (34) where σi denotes the effective opacity and SH computes view-dependent color using spherical harmonics. Unlike implicit neural representations such as NeRF, 3DGS provides an explicit and Lagrangian representation that naturally aligns with particle-based simulation. Following PhysGaussian [50], Gaussian kernels are treated as physical particles, allowing their motion and deformation to be simulated using MPM. Specifically, given simulation conditions and constitutive laws, the MPM simulator predicts particle displacement and deformation: 

xt+1 , Ft+1 = Φ(St), (35) 

At+1 = Ft+1 At(Ft+1 )T , (36) where Φ denotes the differentiable MPM simulator. The updated deformation gradient Ft+1 also transforms the Gaussian covariance A, approximating the local deformation of the kernel. After the simulation step, the updated Gaussian parameters define a 4D Gaussian representation of the dynamic scene. 

D.4 Visual Supervision via Differentiable Rendering 

The simulated 4D Gaussian representation can be rendered into images using Eq. 34. These rendered frames can then be compared with visual observations to compute reconstruction losses. Because both the MPM simulation and the rendering process are differentiable, gradients can be propagated back through the simulation pipeline, enabling optimization of learnable parameters within the physical system. Through this pipeline, constitutive laws determine intrinsic dynamics, MPM simulates these dynamics, and differentiable rendering provides visual supervision, enabling learning of intrinsic dynamics directly from visual observations. 

## E Limitation and Future Work 

Despite the encouraging results, NeuIDO still has several limitations. First, the training in Stage II relies solely on visual supervision. Our multi-view abla-tion experiments show that visual observations provide only limited supervisory signals for intrinsic dynamics. Because the dynamics model is optimized indi-rectly through a rendering-based reconstruction pipeline, the supervision be-comes weak and ambiguous. Moreover, increasing the number of input views brings only marginal improvements, indicating that visual supervision alone is insufficient for reliably constraining intrinsic dynamics. Second, the proposed 30 J. Lin et al. 

neural dynamics operator is fully parameterized by neural networks. Although this design provides strong representational capacity, the lack of explicit physical constraints may lead the model to overfit visual observations rather than learn the true underlying dynamics, similar to issues observed in prior neural consti-tutive modeling approaches such as NeuMA. In future work, we plan to address these limitations by extracting richer and more informative supervisory signals from visual observations and introducing more explicit physical constraints into the operator formulation. We believe such improvements will further advance the development of physics-informed 4D generation and contribute toward more reliable world models. 

## F Approximation of the Neural Intrinsic Dynamics Operator 

F.1 Overall. 

Having parameterized the neural intrinsic dynamics operator bG, we now establish its theoretical capability to approximate the ground-truth continuous mapping 

G : V → C (KC ). Due to the finite-dimensional compression of the video encoder 

E, we assume there exists a fundamental representation error limit bounded by 

ϵenc ≥ 0. Building upon the universal approximation theorem for operator net-works, we show that our branch-trunk architecture can universally approximate 

G up to this limit. 

Theorem 1 (Approximation theorem for Neural Intrinsic Dynamics Operator). Let σ be a continuous nonpolynomial activation function. Under the assumptions above, for any desired approximation error ϵ > 0, there exist positive integers n, D and parameters aki ∈ Rd, wk ∈ Rdc , cki , β ki , ζ k ∈ R (for 

i = 1 , ..., n and k = 1 , ..., D ) such that the branch-trunk operator bG satisfies: 

G(u)( ξ) −

> D

X

> k=1
> n

X

> i=1

cki σ(a⊤

> ki

E(u) + βki )

!| {z }

> branch

σ(wk · ξ + ζk)

| {z }

> trunk

< ϵ enc + ϵ (37) 

This inequality holds for all valid video functions u ∈ V and constitutive inputs 

ξ ∈ KC .

F.2 Setting 

Let KV ⊂ Rdv be a compact video domain, and let C(KV ) denote the Banach space of continuous video functions equipped with the uniform norm ∥ · ∥ ∞.Following Sec. 3.1 in the main text, let V ⊂ C(KV ) be a compact subset rep-resenting the set of valid video observations of interest. Let KC ⊂ Rdc be the compact constitutive-input domain. The target world-dynamics operator is a continuous mapping G : V → C(KC ).NeuIDO 31 

The neural intrinsic dynamics operator adopts a branch–trunk form. Given an input video function u ∈ V , the dynamics encoder E : V → Rd extracts a latent representation E(u), and the branch network maps it to coefficients, while the trunk network parameterizes basis functions over ξ ∈ KC .

F.3 Assumptions 

We make the following assumptions. 

(A1) Compactness. V ⊂ C(KV ) and KC ⊂ Rdc are compact. 

(A2) Continuity of the target operator. G : V → C(KC ) is continuous. 

(A3) Approximate latent factorization. There exists a continuous encoder E :

V → Rd and a continuous map ¯G : E(V) → C(KC ) such that 

G(u)( ξ) − ¯G(E(u))( ξ) ≤ ϵenc , ∀ u ∈ V , ∀ ξ ∈ KC ,

for some ϵenc ≥ 0.

(A4) Universal approximation families. Let σ be a continuous non-polynomial activation function. Then standard feed-forward neural networks with activa-tion σ are universal approximators on compact subsets of finite-dimensional Euclidean spaces. 

F.4 Auxiliary Lemmas 

Lemma 1. If V is compact and E : V → Rd is continuous, then S := E(V) ⊂ Rd

is compact. 

Proof. Since continuous images of compact sets are compact, S = E(V) is com-pact. ⊓⊔

Lemma 2. Let S ⊂ Rd be compact, and let ¯G : S → C(KC ) be continuous. Define 

H : S × KC → R by H(s, ξ) := ¯G(s)( ξ). Then H is continuous on S × KC .

Proof. Take any sequence (sn, ξn) → (s, ξ) in S × KC . Then 

|H(sn, ξn) − H(s, ξ)| ≤ | H(sn, ξn) − H(sn, ξ)| + |H(sn, ξ) − H(s, ξ)|.

For the second term, by continuity of ¯G from S into C(KC ),

|H(sn, ξ) − H(s, ξ)| = | ¯G(sn)( ξ) − ¯G(s)( ξ)| ≤ ∥ ¯G(sn) − ¯G(s)∥∞ → 0.

For the first term, since ¯G(S) ⊂ C(KC ) is compact, it is equicontinuous on KC .Hence, as ξn → ξ,

|H(sn, ξn) − H(sn, ξ)| = | ¯G(sn)( ξn) − ¯G(sn)( ξ)| → 0.

Therefore, H is continuous on S × KC . ⊓⊔32 J. Lin et al. 

Lemma 3. Let S ⊂ Rd and KC ⊂ Rdc be compact, and let H : S × KC → R be continuous. Then for any ε > 0, there exist a positive integer D and continuous functions βk : S → R and ϕk : KC → R for k = 1 , . . . , D such that 

H(s, ξ) −

> D

X

> k=1

βk(s)ϕk(ξ) < ε, ∀ s ∈ S, ∀ ξ ∈ KC .

Proof sketch. This follows from the Stone–Weierstrass theorem on compact prod-uct spaces: finite sums of separable functions of the form β(s)ϕ(ξ) are dense in 

C(S × KC ). ⊓⊔

F.5 Proof of Theorem 1 

Theorem 1. Let σ be a continuous non-polynomial activation function. Under Assumptions (A1)–(A4), for any ϵ > 0, there exist positive integers n, D and parameters 

aki ∈ Rd, wk ∈ Rdc , cki , β ki , ζ k ∈ R, i = 1 , . . . , n, k = 1 , . . . , D, 

such that, for all u ∈ V and ξ ∈ KC ,

G(u)( ξ) −

> D

X

> k=1
> n

X

> i=1

cki σ(a⊤

> ki

E(u) + βki )

!| {z }

> branch

σ(wk · ξ + ζk)

| {z }

> trunk

< ϵ enc + ϵ. 

Proof. By Assumption (A3), for all u ∈ V and ξ ∈ KC ,

G(u)( ξ) − ¯G(E(u))( ξ) ≤ ϵenc .

Let S := E(V). By Lemma 1, S is compact. Define H(s, ξ) := ¯G(s)( ξ) for s ∈ S

and ξ ∈ KC . By Lemma 2, H is continuous on S × KC . Fix an arbitrary ϵ > 0.

Step 1 (Separable approximation). By Lemma 3, there exist a positive integer D and continuous functions {βk}Dk=1 on S and {ϕk}Dk=1 on KC such that 

H(s, ξ) −

> D

X

> k=1

βk(s) ϕk(ξ) < ϵ

3 , ∀ s ∈ S, ∀ ξ ∈ KC . (38) 

Step 2 (Trunk approximation and re-indexing). Set Mβ := max 1≤k≤D ∥βk∥∞.If Mβ = 0 then H is already within ϵ/ 3 of zero and the theorem follows trivially; we therefore assume Mβ > 0. For each k = 1 , . . . , D , since ϕk is continuous on the compact set KC ⊂ Rdc , Assumption (A4) guarantees the existence of a one-hidden-layer network 

˜ϕk(ξ) := 

> Jk

X

> j=1

dkj σ(wkj · ξ + ζkj )NeuIDO 33 

satisfying ∥ϕk − ˜ϕk∥∞ < δ 2, where we choose 

δ2 := ϵ

3 D M β

.

Then, for all s ∈ S and ξ ∈ KC ,

> D

X

> k=1

βk(s) ϕk(ξ) −

> D

X

> k=1

βk(s) ˜ϕk(ξ) ≤

> D

X

> k=1

|βk(s)| ∥ ϕk − ˜ϕk∥∞ < D M β δ2 = ϵ

3 .

(39) We now expand the product and re-index. Set D′ := PDk=1 Jk and enumerate the pairs (k, j ) as a single index m = 1 , . . . , D ′. For each m, define 

γm(s) := dkj βk(s), wm := wkj , ζm := ζkj ,

where (k, j ) is the pair corresponding to m. This re-indexing is an exact algebraic identity:  DX

> k=1

βk(s) ˜ϕk(ξ) = 

> D′

X

> m=1

γm(s) σ(wm · ξ + ζm).

Step 3 (Branch approximation). Since σ is continuous and KC is compact, each trunk unit is bounded on KC . Set 

Mσ := max  

> 1≤m≤D′

sup 

> ξ∈KC

|σ(wm · ξ + ζm)|.

If Mσ = 0 then the approximation is already within 2ϵ/ 3 and we are done; assume Mσ > 0. Each γm is continuous on the compact set S ⊂ Rd, so by As-sumption (A4), for each m = 1 , . . . , D ′, there exists a one-hidden-layer network of width nm,

bm(s) := 

> nm

X

> i=1

cmi σ(a⊤

> mi

s + βmi ),

satisfying ∥γm − bm∥∞ < δ 1, where we choose 

δ1 := ϵ

3 D′ Mσ

.

To obtain a uniform width across all branch networks, set n := max 1≤m≤D′ nm

and, for each m with nm < n , pad with zero coefficients cmi = 0 , ami = 0,

βmi = 0 for i = nm + 1 , . . . , n . This does not change the network output. Hence, for all s ∈ S and ξ ∈ KC ,

> D′

X

> m=1

γm(s) σ(wm · ξ + ζm) −

> D′

X

> m=1

bm(s) σ(wm · ξ + ζm)

≤

> D′

X

> m=1

|γm(s) − bm(s)| | σ(wm · ξ + ζm)|

< D ′ δ1 Mσ = ϵ

3 .

(40) 34 J. Lin et al. 

Combining the bounds. Applying the triangle inequality to (38), (39), and (40), we obtain, for all s ∈ S and ξ ∈ KC ,

H(s, ξ) −

> D′

X

> m=1
> n

X

> i=1

cmi σ(a⊤

> mi

s + βmi )

!

σ(wm · ξ + ζm) < ϵ

3 + ϵ

3 + ϵ

3 = ϵ. 

Finally, substituting s = E(u) and recalling H(E(u), ξ) = ¯G(E(u))( ξ), we obtain by the triangle inequality and Assumption (A3): 

G(u)( ξ) −

> D′

X

> m=1
> n

X

> i=1

cmi σ(a⊤

> mi

E(u) + βmi )

!

σ(wm · ξ + ζm)

≤ G(u)( ξ) − ¯G(E(u))( ξ)

| {z } 

> ≤ϵenc

+ ¯G(E(u))( ξ) −

> D′

X

> m=1

bm(E(u)) σ(wm · ξ + ζm)

| {z }

> < ϵ

< ϵ enc + ϵ. 

for all u ∈ V and ξ ∈ KC . Renaming D′ → D completes the proof. ⊓⊔