Title: Language Models Refine Mechanical Linkage Designs Through Symbolic Reflection and Modular Optimisation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27962v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 01:20:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Language Models Refine Mechanical Linkage Designs Through Symbolic Reflection and Modular Optimisation 

Jo˜ ao Pedro Gandarela 1,2 Thiago Rios 3 Stefan Menzel 3 Andr´ e Freitas 1,4,5 1Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland  

> 2

´Ecole Polytechnique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland 

> 3

Honda Research Institute Europe, Germany 

> 4

Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester, UK 

> 5

National Biomarker Centre, CRUK-MI, University of Manchester, UK 

firstname.lastname@idiap.ch , joao.gandareladesouza@epfl.ch firstname.lastname@honda-ri.de , andre.freitas@manchester.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Designing mechanical linkages involves combinatorial topology selection and continuous param-eter fitting. We show that language models can systematically improve linkage designs through symbolic representations. Language model agents explore discrete topologies while numerical op-timisers fit continuous parameters. A symbolic lifting operator translates simulator trajectories into qualitative descriptors, motion labels, temporal predicates, and structural diagnostics that models interpret across iterative design cycles. Across six engineering-relevant motion targets and three open-source models (Llama 3.3 70B, Qwen3 4B, Qwen3 MoE 30B-A3B), the modular architecture reduces geometric error by up to 68% and improves structural validity by up to 134% over monolithic baselines. Critically, 78.6% of iterative refinement trajectories show measurable improvement, with the system correctly diagnosing overconstraint (56.3%) and underconstraint (35.6%) failure modes and proposing grounded corrections. Models across all three families acquire interpretable mechanical reasoning strategies without fine-tuning, demonstrating that principled symbolic abstraction bridges generative AI and the numerical precision required for engineering design. 

Keywords: mechanical linkage synthesis, generative AI for engineering design, large language models, symbolic representation, multi-agent systems, topology optimisation 

# 1 Introduction 

Mechanical linkages are systems of rigid bodies connected by joints that convert input motion into a desired output path, and are ubiquitous in engineering systems: from automotive suspensions and surgical robots to deployable aerospace structures [1, 2]. Designing linkages to trace prescribed trajec-tories is a long-standing challenge that involves two tightly coupled subproblems that must be solved jointly [8]. The first is a combinatorial decision: choosing how many links and joints to use and how to connect them (the topology ). The second is a continuous fitting task: selecting link lengths, joint offsets, and crank angles so that the end-effector path matches a target curve. Conventional meth-ods address both subproblems with mathematical optimisation [3], but the combinatorial explosion of possible topologies makes exhaustive search impractical, and gradient-based fitting can stall in local minima. 1

> arXiv:2604.27962v1 [cs.AI] 30 Apr 2026

Recent progress in generative AI, particularly Large Language Model (LLM)s, has opened a new avenue for tackling the combinatorial dimension of linkage design problems [27]. LLMs excel at analog-ical reasoning, pattern recognition, and rapid proposal generation across large design spaces, which are capabilities needed to navigate the discrete topology landscape. In industrial practice, such exploration has traditionally relied on catalogue lookup and the reuse of validated mechanisms [4, 7]. However, applying LLMs directly to linkage synthesis exposes a fundamental representational mismatch . Language models process tokenised text and lack an intrinsic notion of coordinate frames, units, or kinematic constraints. As a result, LLM-generated designs are often linguistically coherent, describing plausible-sounding mechanism configurations, but numerically unsound when the proposed link sizes are considered in numerical simulations of the mechanisms [23]. The kinematic equations that govern linkages (loop-closure conditions, screw coordinates) are hard, verifiable constraints [6], that defined the feasibility of the mechanism. Therefore, how can we let language models contribute through combinatorial reasoning while en-suring engineering precision in the continuous domain? We answer this question based on three interlocked ideas: 1. Factorised optimisation. We separate topology selection (handled by LLM agents) from dimensional fitting (handled by numerical optimisers). This separation of concerns allows each component to play to its strengths: language models handle combinatorial structure exploration, while dedicated solvers ensure numerical precision. 2. Symbolic lifting as a representational bridge. We introduce an operator L that converts the dense numerical output of a kinematic simulator, hundreds of sampled trajectory points, degrees-of-freedom reports, and error residuals, into a compact set of qualitative descriptors 

that a language model can interpret: motion labels (e.g., “straight segment”, “sharp turn”), temporal predicates (e.g., “the path crosses the x-axis between t=0 .1 and t=0 .2”), and structural diagnostics (e.g., “mechanism is over-constrained”). These descriptors form a representation bundle R that bridges the gap between geometric state and language-level qualitative reasoning. 3. Closed-loop reflective refinement. Using R, a multi-agent pipeline iterates: a topology agent 

proposes a design; a critic agent diagnoses errors using the symbolic feedback; a planner agent 

maps the diagnosis to a targeted solution (e.g., “overconstraint → remove a redundant link”); and a refiner agent implements the correction. This cycle enables the language model to reflect on symbolic feedback within a single design session , progressively improving candidates without parameter updates. In this paper, we show that combining these ideas into a coherent workflow, where LLMs propose structural variants, numerical optimisers supply validated parameters, and R mediates verifiable re-finements, yields a robust synthesis method with substantially improved fidelity and reduced failure modes compared to purely generative approaches. We validate the approach across experiments on six benchmark motion targets, using three open-source language models of different architectures and scales. Our results demonstrate that 78.6% of iterative refinement trajectories show measurable im-provement, geometric error is reduced by up to 68%, and structural validity improves by up to 134%, relative to monolithic baselines that do not separate topology search from continuous fitting. Crucially, inter-model variance decreases under symbolic feedback, confirming that the representational inter-face, not model scale, is the primary driver of design quality. These results position symbolic lifting as a principled bridge between language-model reasoning and physics-grounded engineering design, with broader implications for domains where combinatorial structure selection must be coupled with continuous parameter optimisation. 2Simulator+Optimiser 

> Gentle Turn→Straight→Very Sharp Turn→Straight→...
> ...

RQ1 (Decomposition) : Does splitting numerical and combinatorial optimisation into a two-stage pipeline change the distance to the target compared with a monolithic approach? 

RQ2 (Representation) : What is the impact of representation on the mechanism? 

RQ3 (Representation) : What systematic tendencies (inductive biases) do representations impose, and how do these tendencies shape the designs the system preferentially generates? 

> RQ2
> RQ1
> RQ3

Linkage topology generator  (Topology Agent )

Refinement plan generator  (Planner )

Topology refinement  (Refinement Agent) 

Mechanism critique  (Si mula tion 

Criti c) 

NL 

Symbolic Lifting Figure 1: Overview of the symbolic lifting and closed-loop synthesis pipeline. Candidate linkage topologies proposed by language model agents are simulated and optimised to produce continuous end-effector trajectories. The symbolic lifting operator L compresses these numerical outputs into a compact representation bundle R, encoding qualitative motion patterns (straight segments, gentle and sharp turns), temporal predicates, and structural diagnostics. This symbolic representation bridges the gap between continuous kinematics and language-level reasoning, enabling iterative, verifiable refinement of mechanism designs. 32 Results 

Our method (Fig. 1) decomposes linkage design into two complementary tasks: language model agents explore the discrete space of linkage topologies, while dedicated numerical optimisers fit continuous parameters (link lengths, joint positions) to minimise the geometric mismatch between the generated end-effector trajectory and a target curve. A symbolic lifting operator L translates dense simula-tor output into compact qualitative descriptors, motion labels, temporal predicates, and structural diagnostics, that the language models use as feedback for subsequent design iterations. We evalu-ate performance using Chamfer distance between generated and target trajectories (lower is better) and semantic success rate (the fraction of designs that parse and simulate without error); full metric definitions and experimental protocols are given in Methods (Section 4). We evaluated the modular framework (Fig. 1) using three open-source language models, Llama3.3 (70B) (Llama), Qwen3 (4B) (Qwen), and Qwen3 (30B-A3B) (Qwen3 MoE), on six engineering-relevant motion targets (Parabola, NACA airfoil, Line, Ellipse, Circle, and Lemniscate of Bernoulli). Full experimental details including hyperparameters, simulator configuration, and evaluation protocols are given in Methods. 

2.1 Language models reason through symbolic feedback 

The central question of this work is whether language models can engage in reflective reasoning about mechanism structure and improve designs through structured symbolic feedback. Figures 2 and 3 present direct evidence that they can. 

Iterative refinement produces systematic improvement. Across all experiments, 78.6% of refinement trajectories, sequences of iterative design cycles in which the method pro-poses, evaluates, and refines a linkage for a single model-shape configuration, show monotonic improvement in Chamfer distance, with an average relative improvement of 23.8% per trajectory (measured as ( CD initial − CD final )/CD initial , i.e. the relative reduction from the first to the last iteration within each trajectory). This indicates that the critic →planner →refiner chain systemati-cally translates symbolic diagnoses into effective structural corrections, rather than producing random perturbations. Figure 2 visualises representative improvement trajectories across three model families and multiple target shapes, confirming that the reflexive feedback signal is robust across architectures. The monotonic improvement visible in Figure 2 confirms that symbolic feedback yields a directed refinement signal rather than stochastic perturbation. This is significant because it demonstrates that the propose → critique → correct cycle produces cumulative gains in geometric fidelity, a behaviour consistent across all three model families despite their architectural differences. 

Failure-mode diagnosis reveals mechanistic reasoning. The Refinement Planning Agent con-sistently identifies structurally meaningful failure modes from the symbolic feedback (Table 1). The two dominant modes, overconstraint (56.3% of diagnosed iterations) and underconstraint (35.6%), account for 91.9% of all diagnosed failures. Less frequent modes include kinematic inaccuracy (1.6%), path deviation (0.3%), and path misalignment (0.2%). This distribution confirms that the symbolic lifting layer surfaces the mechanically relevant information, primarily degrees-of-freedom and connec-tivity diagnostics, that enables the planner to reason about structural rather than purely numerical 

causes of error. 

Reasoning chains demonstrate mechanistically grounded corrections. Figure 3 presents a detailed annotated example showing how the symbolic lifting operator L transforms raw simulation 40 2 4 6 8 10 12 

Refinement iteration 

> 0.0
> 2.5
> 5.0
> 7.5
> 10.0
> 12.5
> 15.0
> 17.5
> Chamfer distance

Line (Qwen3 4B) 

= 100% improvement     

> underconstr.
> underconstr.
> underconstr.
> 02468

Refinement iteration 

> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> 1.50
> 1.75
> Chamfer distance

Circle (Qwen3 MoE 30B (thinking)) 

= 100% improvement     

> underconstr.
> path coverage fa
> Poor path approx
> 02468

Refinement iteration 

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> Chamfer distance

Line (Llama 3.3 70B) 

= 99% improvement     

> underconstr.
> overconstr.
> overconstr.
> 02468

Refinement iteration 

> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> 1.50
> 1.75
> Chamfer distance

NACA (Qwen3 MoE 30B) 

= 92% improvement    

> overconstr.
> overconstr.
> underconstr.
> 0510 15

Refinement iteration 

> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> 8
> 9
> 10
> Chamfer distance

Lemniscate (Qwen3 4B) 

= 65% improvement    

> underconstr.
> underconstr.
> overconstr.
> 0510 15

Refinement iteration 

> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> 6
> 7
> Chamfer distance

Ellipse (Qwen3 4B) 

= 63% improvement 

> overconstr. overconstr.
> underconstr.

Iterative reasoning trajectories: symbolic feedback drives systematic improvement Figure 2: Representative reasoning-driven improvement trajectories showing how language model agents refine linkage designs across iterative cycles. Each panel shows one model-shape combination; the y-axis tracks Chamfer distance (lower is better). The consistent downward trend across heteroge-neous models and shapes demonstrates that symbolic feedback enables genuine mechanistic reflection, not random search. 5output into interpretable qualitative descriptors that the planner uses to formulate structural correc-tions. The examples below show additional representative reasoning chains from the pipeline across diverse models and target shapes, illustrating how the planner diagnoses structural causes and proposes targeted mechanical edits based on the symbolic representations. 0 2 4 6 8

Refinement iteration 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

1.2 

1.4 

> Chamfer distance

Detailed reasoning trajectory: NACA (Qwen3 MoE 30B) 

Overconstraint 

Underconstraint 

Other 

> Iter 0: overconstraint
> The coupler joint C is geometrically positioned such that th
> Iter 1: overconstraint
> The target joint E is defined as a revolute joint with dual
> Iter 2: underconstraint
> The target joint E is defined as a revolute joint with arbit
> Iter 3: overconstraint
> The mechanism contains a redundant internal revolute joint E

Figure 3: Detailed reasoning trajectory for a single experiment showing how the symbolic lifting oper-ator L enables structured mechanical reasoning. The annotations trace the full diagnostic cycle: raw simulation output → symbolic abstraction → failure-mode diagnosis → structural correction. This interpretable reasoning chain, produced without any fine-tuning, demonstrates that symbolic repre-sentations provide language models with the domain-specific vocabulary needed for engineering design reasoning. Unlike tool-augmented approaches that expose raw API outputs, our method presents sym-bolically lifted representations that encode mechanistically relevant information (DOF counts, motion labels, temporal predicates), enabling the planner to pinpoint specific structural deficiencies. The diagnostic chain illustrated in Figure 3 reveals a structured reasoning pattern: the planner does not simply relay numerical error magnitudes but instead identifies categorical structural causes (e.g., “overconstrained substructure at joint C”) and prescribes mechanistically appropriate corrections (e.g., “remove the redundant link to restore single-DOF mobility”). This interpretability distinguishes our approach from end-to-end generative methods where intermediate reasoning steps remain opaque. 6Failure Mode Proportion (%) Overconstraint 56.3 Underconstraint 35.6 Kinematic Inaccuracy 1.6 None 0.6 ¡One Of: Underconstraint, Overconstraint¿ 0.4 Path Deviation 0.3 Path Misalignment 0.2 Table 1: Distribution of failure modes identified by the planner across all experiments. The planner diagnoses structural issues in candidate mechanisms and proposes targeted corrections. Reasoning Chain: Lemniscate (Llama 3.3 70B), Iteration 5 , ↓ improved 

Failure Mode: underconstraint 

Structural Cause: The current five-bar linkage mechanism has low kinematic accuracy due to the interaction between the crank link, intermediate links, and target joint, which may not perfectly replicate the complex motion required for the Lemniscate shape. 

Suggested Action: Add an additional link or loop closure to improve the kinematic accuracy. Specifically, add a new revolute joint between the target joint and one of the intermediate links to increase the degree of freedom and allow for more precise control over the motion of the target. 

Temporal Specification (excerpt): 

G [0.00,1.00](in(R in)) ∧ F [0.015,0.035](INF | EX x | EX y) ∧

F [0.050,0.060](INF | EX x | EX y) ∧ F [0.065,0.096](INF | EX x | EX y) ∧ ... 

Diagnostic link: The target temporal specification requires dense F-bounded inflection and extremum events ( INF | EX x | EX y ) at many closely spaced intervals throughout the motion cycle, encoding the Lemniscate’s multiple curvature reversals and direction changes. The current five-bar topology cannot generate this event density: with only one coupler loop, the end-effector’s trajectory lacks sufficient kinematic complexity to produce the required inflection points. This mismatch between the temporal event density demanded by the specification and the structural capacity of the mechanism is what the planner identifies as underconstraint , the topology is too simple, motivating the addition of a sixth link and new loop closure to increase the mechanism’s curve-tracing expressiveness. 7Reasoning Chain: NACA Airfoil (Qwen3 MoE 30B), Iteration 7 

Failure Mode: underconstraint 

Structural Cause: The coupler link (B–C) and target joint (E) form a substructure with insufficient geometric flexibility to accurately track the desired path, particularly in high-curvature regions. The fixed distance constraints on E restrict its ability to conform to local trajectory curvature. 

Suggested Action: Add a new revolute joint F on the coupler link C, positioned at an optimised location along the segment B–C, and reposition the target joint E as a dependent revolute joint connected to F instead of directly to B and C. This introduces a new degree of freedom in the coupler substructure via a ternary link with a floating joint. 

Temporal Specification (excerpt): 

G [0.00,0.02](in(R in)) ∧ G [0.05,0.09](in(R in)) ∧ G [0.11,0.15](in(R in)) ∧

G [0.18,0.21](in(R in)) ∧ ... 

Diagnostic link: The temporal specification is dominated by G[a,b ](in(R in) ) predicates, 

always-in-region constraints over many narrow, contiguous time windows. These encode that the NACA airfoil path requires the end-effector to continuously remain within the target bounding region across closely spaced sub-intervals, demanding smooth, curvature-faithful path tracking. The current coupler substructure, with fixed distance constraints on E to both B and C, restricts E to a single coupler curve that cannot conform to the local curvature variations revealed by the dense G predicates. The planner thus diagnoses effective underconstraint 

(the topology is geometrically inflexible, not functionally sufficient) and prescribes a floating intermediate joint F to introduce local geometric freedom, enabling the mechanism to satisfy the G-containment requirements in high-curvature regions. 

Reasoning Chain: Straight Line (Qwen3 MoE 30B), Iteration 8 

Failure Mode: overconstraint 

Structural Cause: Joint C is defined with incompatible geometric constraints: the distance between its anchor points (B and D) exceeds the sum of its specified radii, making the constraint system geometrically infeasible. The structural fault is a mismatch between joint coordinates and assigned link distances. 

Suggested Action: Remove joint C and replace it with a coupler link between B and D directly, forming a standard four-bar linkage (A–B–C–D), where C is a new revolute joint defined only by the intersection of circles from B and D. Then re-establish the path-tracking chain via a new coupler link from C to E. 

Diagnostic link: No temporal specification is produced because the mechanism is unbuildable ,the symbolic lifting operator L receives no trajectory from the simulator and therefore emits no temporal predicates. The absence of the temporal specification is itself the diagnostic signal: a buildable mechanism would produce at minimum a G[0 ,1] (in(R in) ) containment predicate. The planner interprets this null output alongside the simulator’s constraint-violation report to identify the geometric infeasibility at joint C, diagnosing overconstraint and prescribing the removal of the conflicting joint definition to restore a buildable four-bar foundation. 

8Reasoning Chain: Ellipse (Qwen3 MoE 30B-Thinking), Iteration 8 

Failure Mode: overconstraint 

Structural Cause: The mechanism contains a redundant triangle (crank–target–D) that creates a 4-joint loop with inconsistent mobility. The current design has 6 joints for 6 links, but 7 joints are required for 1-DOF ( F = 3(6 − 1) − 2 × 6 = 3 DOF). The direct crank–D link creates an unnecessary constraint that makes the system immobile. 

Suggested Action: Replace the D joint definition to remove the direct crank–D link. Change D to connect only the target to B (not crank to D), and create a new E–D joint, restructuring the topology into a single well-constrained kinematic chain. 

Temporal Specification (excerpt): 

G [0.00,1.00](in(R in)) ∧ F [0.00,1.00](INF | EX x | EX y) ∧ (¬cross(L 0) U [0.00,1.00] in(R in)) ∧ ... 

Diagnostic link: This specification combines three distinct temporal operator types, each encoding a different kinematic requirement for the ellipse. The G[0 ,1] (in(R in) ) demands global containment; the F[0 ,1] (INF | EX x | EX y ) requires that inflection or extremum events eventually occur; and the U (until) predicate ¬cross(L 0) U[0 ,1] in(R in) imposes a temporal ordering constraint, the trajectory must not cross the reference boundary until it re-enters the target region. The redundant crank–target–D triangle identified by the planner yields 

F = 3 DOF instead of the required F = 1, creating structural immobility that prevents the mechanism from satisfying the U-ordering: without smooth, single-DOF motion, the trajectory cannot maintain the sequenced enter–stay–exit pattern the U predicate encodes. The planner’s topological edit removes the redundant loop to restore 1-DOF mobility, aligning the mechanism’s kinematic capacity with the temporal ordering demanded by the specification. 

These chains reveal that the language model agents are not merely pattern-matching: they identify specific structural deficiencies (e.g., “rigid chain of revolute joints creates over-constrained substruc-ture”, “insufficient geometric flexibility to track high-curvature regions”) and propose mechanistically appropriate corrections (e.g., “insert a parallel link to create a secondary loop”, “reposition the coupler joint to satisfy distance constraints”). Crucially, this reasoning behaviour is consistent across model families, from the 4B-parameter Qwen3 to the 70B-parameter Llama 3.3, indicating that the symbolic interface enables mechanical reasoning and not model scale alone. 

2.2 Modular design achieves superior geometric accuracy 

The modular approach, separating topology search from continuous fitting, consistently reduces the mismatch to the targeted trajectories across all model and shape combinations (Table 2). Across the six shapes, the modular method reduces the Chamfer distance by approximately 44% for Llama and 48% for Qwen under Grid search. Quantitative outcomes per-shape show substantial Chamfer distance reductions: approximately 49.5% for Circle, 67.7% for Line, and 36.2% for Parabola. To benchmark against a classical search baseline, we compare our symbolic pipeline with Enum+GA while preserving each method’s natural grouping: Enum+GA is reported by budget and bar family, and the symbolic method is reported by model family. Table 2 reports per-shape Chamfer values and aggregated normalized indices, while Table 2 provides the standalone normalized x/Base view. Panel C of Table 2 compares the symbolic method against Enum+GA across matched evaluation budgets. At the same budget as our method (3 ×20 and 6 ×20 population ×generations), the symbolic method consistently outperforms Enum+GA by 30-57%, a gap we attribute to the reasoning capa-bilities of the underlying language model: rather than blindly exploring the search space, the LLM leverages structural priors to propose topologically meaningful configurations from the outset. 9A) Effect of Representation 

Model Type x/Base ∆ (On −Off ) 

Llama Off 1.000 ↑13.8% On ↑0.862 

Qwen Off 1.000 ↓0.2% On ↓1.002 Qwen3 MoE Off 1.000 ↑45.6% On ↑0.544 

B) Optimizer Comparison 

Model Type x/Base ∆ (x −Base) 

Base 1.000 

Llama Grid ↑0.588 ↑41.2% PSO ↓1.185 ↓18.5% Base 1.000 

Qwen Grid ↑0.544 ↑45.6% PSO ↑0.810 ↑19.0% 

C) Enum+GA vs. Symbolic by Budget and Bars 

Pop. × Gen. Bars Model x/Base ∆ (x −Base) Imp.% 

3×20 4 Llama 0.437 ± 0.142 ↓0.563 ↑56 .3% 3×20 4 Qwen 0.434 ± 0.132 ↓0.566 ↑56 .6% 3×20 4 Qwen3 MoE 0.508 ± 0.130 ↓0.492 ↑49 .2% 3×20 6 Llama 0.516 ± 0.157 ↓0.484 ↑48 .4% 3×20 6 Qwen 0.512 ± 0.147 ↓0.488 ↑48 .8% 3×20 6 Qwen3 MoE 0.604 ± 0.152 ↓0.396 ↑39 .6% 6×20 4 Llama 0.543 ± 0.148 ↓0.457 ↑45 .7% 6×20 4 Qwen 0.543 ± 0.137 ↓0.457 ↑45 .7% 6×20 4 Qwen3 MoE 0.638 ± 0.133 ↓0.362 ↑36 .2% 6×20 6 Llama 0.599 ± 0.179 ↓0.401 ↑40 .1% 6×20 6 Qwen 0.595 ± 0.170 ↓0.405 ↑40 .5% 6×20 6 Qwen3 MoE 0.703 ± 0.179 ↓0.297 ↑29 .7% Table 2: Normalized Index (x/Base) results across three experimental axes. Panel A shows the effect of structured representation (On vs. Off) on mean Chamfer distance; values below 1.0 indicate improvement over the unstructured baseline. Panel B compares optimizer strategies (Grid search vs. PSO) against the monolithic baseline for Llama and Qwen. Panel C compares Enum+GA (baseline = 1 .0) against the symbolic method grouped by population ×generation budget and bar count; values are mean ± standard error aggregated across shared target shapes. Bold entries denote the best result per model and panel. Panels A and B support RQ1 and RQ2 ; Panel C supports RQ3 .10 Figure 4 shows mean optimisation trajectories for representative tasks. Modular and representation-aware configurations consistently outperform the monolithic baseline, converging faster and reaching lower final objective values across all tested geometries.   

> (a) Parabola (b) Lemniscate of Bernoulli
> (c) Line (d) NACA airfoil

Figure 4: Mean optimisation trajectories for representative tasks using Grid search with Llama. Mod-ular and representation-aware configurations (coloured curves) consistently converge faster and reach lower final objective values than the monolithic baseline (black dashed), across all geometries. The shared convergence pattern, independent of task complexity, indicates that gains arise from the struc-tured separation of combinatorial and continuous concerns [8] rather than being task-specific. In all four panels, modular configurations reach lower plateaux within fewer iterations, confirming that symbolic lifting provides a more informative starting point for the numerical optimiser. The convergence profiles in Figure 4 have two notable characteristics. First, the modular configu-rations (coloured curves) reach lower final objective values than the monolithic baseline across all four target shapes, confirming the quantitative findings in Table 2. Second, representation-enriched config-urations converge earlier, suggesting that the symbolic descriptors provided by L guide the topology agent toward structurally sound initial proposals that require less continuous refinement. This is con-sistent with the general principle that factorising mixed discrete-continuous problems into specialised subproblems improves both solution quality and convergence speed [3]. 

2.3 Improved structural validity and semantic correctness 

The geometric improvements translate directly into better structural validity. Semantic correctness, measured as the fraction of generated mechanisms that both parse and simulate without error, increases substantially (Table 3). On average, semantic scores improve by approximately 56.5% relative to the 11 baselines, with extreme cases showing 134% improvement (e.g., Qwen on Circle: 0.057 → 0.835), converting near-failure cases into semantically correct reconstructions. 

Model Type Value ∆ (x-Base) Imp. % 

Base 0.624 

Llama Grid 0.967 ↑0.343 ↑55.0% PSO 0.924 ↑0.300 ↑48.1% Base 0.427 

Qwen Grid 0.824 ↑0.397 ↑93.0% PSO 1.000 ↑0.573 ↑134.1% Table 3: Semantic correctness (fraction of semantically valid outputs) by model and optimiser; bold entries mark best result. The modular procedure substantially increases semantic validity across models (e.g. Qwen 100% vs. baseline 0.42). These results show the modular method improves not only numerical objectives but also semantic success, and, together with representation analyses in Table 2, illustrate how representation choices influence output correctness (supports RQ1 and RQ2 ). 

2.4 Symbolic lifting reduces inter-model variance 

A practical concern for deploying AI-assisted design is robustness across different model architectures. We find that symbolic lifting substantially reduces performance variance across the three heterogeneous model families (Table 2, Fig. 5). When symbolic representations are provided, distinct architectures converge to comparable per-formance levels. As shown in Fig. 5, both the discrete-segmental and compositional representations display similar distributions across models, confirming that abstracting low-level differences via a common symbolic interface stabilises downstream results. This demonstrates that the symbolic in-terface, not model scale, drives consistent design quality , an important finding for practical deployment where model choice may be constrained by cost or availability. Figure 5 reveals that the distribution of Chamfer distances narrows considerably when symbolic representations are provided: the spread between the best and worst model families shrinks, and the median values converge. This confirms the findings in Table 2 and supports the interpretation that the compact, semantics-preserving bundle R acts as a normalising interface. Practically, this means that practitioners can select models based on cost or latency constraints without substantial loss in design quality, a key consideration for deployable AI-assisted engineering workflows. 

2.5 Planner guides constraint satisfaction 

Language models often struggle with strict numerical constraints during generation. The Refinement Planning Agent mitigates this by interpreting diagnostic feedback and mapping it to canonical cor-rective actions (e.g., overconstraint 7 → remove a redundant link; underconstraint 7 → add a loop). As summarised in Table 4, enabling the Planner and enabling Symbolic Lifting (SL) both consistently move Goal links closer to the ideal target (0) across all three model families. The improvements are systematic, with the strongest gains typically observed for Qwen3 MoE, supporting the conclusion that symbolic structural feedback and explicit planning both help the method satisfy discrete design constraints; see Table 4 for the exact values. 12 Shape: Circle    

> Shape: Ellipse
> Shape: Line
> Shape: Naca
> Shape: Parabola
> llama qwen-moe qwen
> Shape: Lb
> Method
> DR QG

Figure 5: Distribution of best Chamfer distance by model family and representation method. Each raincloud combines a half-violin density, boxplot, and whiskers. Rows correspond to the six target shapes; columns compare discrete-segmental (blue) and compositional (orange) representations across Llama, Qwen3 MoE, and Qwen. When symbolic representations are active, inter-model variance decreases substantially, indicating that the symbolic interface, rather than model architecture, is the primary driver of design quality. This variance-reduction effect is analogous to how structured prompt-ing stabilises outputs across model scales. 13 Planner SL Model Config Goal links Imp. % Goal links Imp. % 

Llama Off 2.605 ↑5.5% 2.706 ↑12.1% On 2.461 2.380 

∆ ↑0.144 ↑0.326 Qwen Off 2.130 ↑6.2% 2.124 ↑8.0% On 1.997 1.955 

∆ ↑0.133 ↑0.170 Qwen3 MoE Off 1.621 ↑13.2% 1.570 ↑13.9% On 1.407 1.352 

∆ ↑0.214 ↑0.218 Table 4: Effect of the Refinement Planning Agent (Planner) and structural representation (SL) on Goal links. Mean Goal-link values (closer to 0 is better) are shown for Off and On configurations; bold entries mark the best result per condition. 

2.6 Generated mechanisms approximate engineering-relevant shapes 

Beyond quantitative metrics, visual inspection of the generated mechanisms confirms that our method captures both global shape structure and local geometric features. Figure 6 presents representative outputs for four target shapes, demonstrating the method’s ability to produce physically realisable linkage mechanisms that approximate complex engineering curves.                    

> (a) NACA airfoil approximation produced by a6-bar linkage (Qwen3 MoE, PSO).
> (b) Lemniscate of Bernoulli pro-duced by an 8-bar linkage (Qwen3 MoE, PSO).
> (c) Straight-line mechanism pro-duced by a4-bar linkage (Qwen, Grid).

Figure 6: Representative mechanism outputs for three target shapes. In each plot: thin lines are the rigid bars (links) constituting the mechanism skeleton; thick lines trace the complete joint trajec-tories over one full crank rotation; different colours identify different joints, with the end-effector trace shown as the most prominent coloured curve. The AI-designed linkages successfully approximate engineering-relevant curves, including a NACA 4-digit airfoil profile (a), a lemniscate figure-eight (b), and a straight-line motion (c). The NACA result is particularly noteworthy given the parametric com-plexity of airfoil profiles. Additional qualitative results with full visual detail are shown in Appendix Figs. 7–9. The NACA airfoil results (Fig. 6a) are particularly illustrative: despite the parametric complexity 14 of airfoil profiles, characterised by leading-edge sharpness and asymmetric curvature, the generated mechanisms successfully approximate the key visual signatures used in aerospace applications. This demonstrates that the framework can handle shape targets directly relevant to engineering practice. 

# 3 Discussion 

3.1 Reflective reasoning and representation in AI-driven mechanism design 

The results of our experiments provide direct empirical evidence that language models engage in struc-tured mechanical reasoning when given appropriate symbolic representations. The reasoning chains (Section 2.1, Figs. 2–3) reveal that agents diagnose specific structural deficiencies, such as overcon-strained substructures, redundant ground connections, or insufficient geometric flexibility in coupler links, and propose targeted corrections drawn from established mechanism design principles. This reflective reasoning behaviour, achieved without any parameter updates or fine-tuning, has significant implications for AI-assisted engineering design and justifies the 78.6% monotonic improvement rate across refinement trajectories observed in the experiments. Viewed through the lens of structured representation, the symbolic lifting operator L functions as a structured encoding layer: it projects high-dimensional simulator state into a compact, interpretable feature space of qualitative descriptors (motion labels, temporal predicates, and structural diagnostics). Unlike latent embeddings produced by neural approaches [22, 26], these representations are fully interpretable , engineers can inspect the symbolic descriptors to understand why a particular diagnosis was reached and what structural modification is proposed. This transparency positions the framework as a step toward explainable AI for engineering design : the symbolic representations serve simultaneously as the model’s “working memory” for reasoning and as an audit trail that domain experts can verify. The consistency of mechanistic reasoning across three architecturally heterogeneous model families (Figs. 2, 5) supports the interpretation that it is the representation , not the model, that enables domain-appropriate reasoning. This finding is in line with recent work on structured prompting [13] and tool-augmented language models [18], but extends it to a domain where correctness is physically verifiable: every proposed design is validated by kinematic simulation before acceptance. Prior work on LLM-based agents for structured decision-making [13, 12] has shown that inter-leaving reasoning with actions improves task performance. Our multi-agent decomposition extends this paradigm to engineering: by binding high-level reasoning to mechanistic interfaces and compact symbolic artefacts, we ensure that proposals remain verifiable and physically actionable. This differs from tool-augmented LLM approaches [18, 19] in that our agents receive not raw tool outputs but symbolically lifted representations specifically designed for mechanical reasoning. 

3.2 Model-specific behaviours reveal architectural insights 

The three model families exhibit distinct design behaviours that illuminate how architectural choices interact with the symbolic interface: 

Llama acts as a robust generalist, maintaining high semantic correctness ( ≈ 0.96 −0.98) and stable performance across all tasks. However, its optimisation profile is flat: while it rarely fails, it also rarely reaches the extreme minima achieved by Qwen in favourable conditions. 

Qwen exhibits a high-variance, “deep-valley” profile. In the unconstrained baseline it struggles significantly with complex constraints, but once the search space is structured by the modular method, it frequently surpasses Llama in raw minimisation depth. For example, Qwen achieves a Chamfer distance of 513.72 on Parabola, substantially lower than Llama’s 692.30. 15 Qwen3 MoE benefits most strongly from symbolic representations. We hypothesise that symbolic lifting functions as a variance-reduction filter for the mixture-of-experts routing: by normalising diverse agent outputs into a consistent symbolic structure, it stabilises the input distribution seen by the gating network, increasing the likelihood that geometric sub-problems are directed to relevant expert modules. This hypothesis is consistent with the empirical observation that Qwen3 MoE achieves near-perfect constraint adherence ( −0.0021) when guided by the planner. 

3.3 Engineering impact and broader applicability 

While we demonstrated the framework on planar linkage synthesis, the underlying architecture, fac-torised search, symbolic lifting, and closed-loop refinement, is domain-agnostic and directly applicable to other mechanical design problems where combinatorial and continuous decisions must be jointly optimised: 

• Topology optimisation : the factorisation principle directly maps to separating structural topology decisions from material distribution and sizing, a long-standing challenge in structural engineering [9]. 

• Compliant mechanism design : these mechanisms blend rigid-body kinematics with elastic deformation, requiring the same interplay of discrete topology and continuous compliance that our framework addresses. 

• Gear train and cam design : the combinatorial selection of gear ratios, tooth profiles, or cam profiles paired with continuous dimensional optimisation follows the same factorised structure. 

• Robotic mechanism synthesis : the design of grippers, prosthetic hands, and deployable structures involves linkage-like topology choices that could benefit from LLM-guided exploration. These application domains connect directly to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals that motivate this work. By enabling more efficient exploration of design spaces, AI-assisted mecha-nism synthesis supports SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure) through accelerated pro-totyping and reduced engineering iteration cycles. The framework’s ability to evaluate and reject infeasible designs early, before physical prototyping, contributes to SDG 12 (Responsible Consump-tion and Production) by reducing material waste in the design process. 

3.4 Relationship to prior work 

Our approach bridges two gaps in the mechanism synthesis landscape. On one hand, classical math-ematical optimisation [1, 2, 3] and recent ML-driven approaches [22, 17, 24, 26] perform effective continuous fitting but lack analogy-based proposal mechanisms for navigating combinatorial topology spaces. On the other hand, neuro-symbolic methods [16, 11] have demonstrated the value of combin-ing neural and symbolic reasoning, but have not been applied to engineering synthesis with verified physical constraints. Our work also relates to grounded language model systems in robotics. SayCan [14] grounds LLM prescriptions through skill affordances, but operates on action selection rather than design synthesis. HuggingGPT [19] orchestrates specialist models via a controller pattern, an architectural precedent for our coordinator, but targets open-ended tasks rather than constrained engineering problems. The dis-tinctive contribution of our framework is the combination of symbolic lifting with validated kinematic simulation in a closed loop, ensuring that every design iteration is physically verifiable. 16 3.5 Limitations and future directions 

Some limitations should be noted. First, our evaluation is restricted to planar linkages; extending to spatial (3D) mechanisms will require richer symbolic vocabularies and more complex kinematic solvers. Second, while we demonstrated reflective reasoning through symbolic feedback, we did not fine-tune the language models on mechanism design corpora; doing so could further improve performance, especially for smaller models. The reliance on open-source models, as recommended for reproducibility [20, 28], means our findings are fully reproducible. Future work should explore: (i) extension to spatial mechanisms and multi-body dynamics; (ii) integration with physics-informed neural networks for surrogate simulation [10]; (iii) human-in-the-loop workflows where the symbolic representations serve as an interpretable communication layer between AI agents and engineers; and (iv) systematic evaluation of the framework’s explainability properties, using the symbolic reasoning traces as design rationales that can be formally audited against engineering standards. 

# 4 Methods 

4.1 Problem formulation 

The design task is interactive and language-driven: given a motion goal expressed in natural language, a team of language-model-based agents must propose, evaluate, and iteratively refine a planar linkage so that its end-effector follows the desired path. The problem decomposes into a discrete combinatorial subproblem (selecting a topology: which links and joints to use, and how to connect them) and a continuous subproblem (fitting link lengths, joint offsets, and crank angles to minimise the distance between the realised and target trajectories). 

4.2 Architecture overview 

The framework is organised into three layers (Fig. 1). At the top, a natural-language design intent drives the LLM agents. At the bottom, a validated kinematic simulator [21] executes candidate linkages and returns sampled end-effector trajectories. Between these layers sits the symbolic lifting and optimisation layer, which (i) translates dense numerical outputs into compact symbolic descriptions that LLM agents can reason about, and (ii) performs continuous optimisation to fit a candidate topology to the target motion. This architecture enforces a clear division of responsibilities: the LLM handles combinatorial search and analogical reasoning (what topology might work?), while the optimiser and simulator handle numerical precision and fitting of the performed to the targeted end-effector trajectory. The symbolic representation bundle R is the contract between these two worlds (formal definitions are given in Supplementary Section A.1). 

4.3 Symbolic lifting 

The symbolic lifting operator L compresses dense, noisy trajectory evidence and low-level simulator diagnostics into a small set of stable, semantically meaningful symbols. Let γ : [0 , 1] → R2 denote the end-effector trajectory, {pi}Ni=0 its sampled proxy, and sim msg the simulator diagnostics. The operator maps these to a representation bundle: 

L :  γ, {pi}, sim msg  7 −→ R .

The representation bundle R = ( T , S, C) is factored into three components: 17 • T : a bounded vocabulary of atomic tokens (quantised headings, curvature signs, monotonicity flags, event tags). 

• S: composite sketches formed by composing tokens into ordered spatial-temporal summaries. 

• C: structural and mechanical information (degrees of freedom, bar counts, joint counts, feasibility diagnostics). Two design principles govern R. Hysteresis ensures that small perturbations in simulation out-put do not flip token values, so descriptions reflect persistent geometric structure rather than noise. 

Compositionality ensures that atomic tokens combine into sketches and temporal predicates, allow-ing complex motions to be described as structured combinations of simpler parts. We implement two complementary lifting approaches: 1. Discrete Segmental Representation : segments the trace into a concise sequence of high-level motion motifs (runs, turns, pauses), prioritising temporal organisation and data reduction. From sampled positions, local kinematic proxies (velocities, angular changes) are computed and mapped to labels Li ∈ { Pause , Straight , Gentle Turn , Sharp Turn , U-turn } using interpretable thresholds. 2. Compositional Lifting : detects local geometric features (curvature sign, inflection points, self-intersections) and composes them into temporal predicates, prioritising qualitative geometric structure. The lifting also generates bounded temporal logic formulas that express qualitative intent as formal constraints. Full mathematical details of both approaches, including the qualitative signature, event alphabet, feature primitives, and temporal logic operators, are provided in Supplementary Sections A.2–A.4. 

4.4 Multi-agent pipeline 

The synthesis pipeline comprises four cooperating agents that communicate through the shared rep-resentation bundle R (Algorithm 1). 1. Topology Agent : proposes discrete linkage hypotheses and supplies initial parameterisations, drawing on exemplar memory for analogical transfer and API contracts for structured output. 2. Simulation Critic : fuses numerical quantities, symbolic surrogates from R, and simulator diag-nostics to identify trajectory error modes and report mobility anomalies, producing a structured report with evidence-backed blocks (Kinematic Accuracy, Mobility/DOF, Compositionality, Rec-ommendation). 3. Refinement Planning Agent : interprets the critic’s diagnosis and maps it to corrective actions using a failure-mode reference table (e.g., underconstraint 7 → add a loop; overconstraint 7 →

remove a redundant link), applying a minimal-change heuristic. 4. Refinement Agent : operationalises the planner’s instructions into a new mechanism, enforcing connectivity checks, DOF parity verification, and API compliance before re-optimisation. 18 Algorithm 1 Iterative Topology Refinement Loop  

> 1:

for episode = 1 to N do  

> 2:

T, p ← TopologyAgent (I, memory)  

> 3:

trace , diagnostics , distance ← SimulatorOptimiser.run (T, p ) 

> 4:

if distance ≤ ϵ then  

> 5:

break  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

R ← SymbolicLifting (trace , diagnostics)  

> 8:

report ← Critic.report (T, p, R, diagnostics)  

> 9:

O ← Planner.plan (report , failure table)  

> 10:

T, p ← Refiner.apply (T, O ) 

> 11:

trace , diagnostics , distance ← SimulatorOptimiser.run (T, p ) 

> 12:

if distance ≤ ϵ then  

> 13:

break  

> 14:

end if  

> 15:

end for 

4.5 Experimental setup 

We evaluated Llama [20], Qwen, and Qwen3 MoE [28] on six target shapes: Parabola, NACA airfoil, Line, Ellipse, Circle, and Lemniscate of Bernoulli (Lemniscates of Bernoulli ( ∞) (LB)). For every model–shape pair, we ran both optimisers (Grid and PSO) and toggled the LLM planner, discrete segmental representation, and compositional lifting to cover every combination. Models were sampled with temperature 0.8 using the pylinkage simulator [21]. The models were chosen to ensure architectural diversity: Llama serves as a widely-used single-expert baseline; Qwen provides a contemporary instruction-tuned model with different pretraining characteristics; and Qwen3 MoE probes mixture-of-experts routing. All models are open-source, en-abling full reproducibility. The monolithic baseline is the method described in [25]. At each optimisation iteration, three candidate mechanisms were drawn; the search used Rmax =10 refinement rounds and convergence threshold ϵ = 0 .005. For Qwen (4B parameters), Rmax was increased to 20 to compensate for its smaller capacity; despite the doubled iteration count, total computational cost remains a fraction of that for Llama (70B). 

4.6 Evaluation metrics 

For each shape, 5 independent samples were drawn and Chamfer distance was computed for each simulated/target pair after alignment via the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm [15, 5]. Reported scores are mean ± standard error across the five samples. Semantic success is a binary indicator: a generated mechanism counts as successful if it both parses and executes in the simulator without parse, compile, or runtime errors. All reported results are averages over runs for each model–shape configuration. Specific kinematic thresholds for the symbolic representations are detailed in Supplementary Sec-tion A.6. 

# References 

[1] John J Uicker Jr, J Denavit, and RS Hartenberg. “An iterative method for the displacement analysis of spatial mechanisms”. In: (1964). 19 [2] George N Sandor and Arthur G Erdman. Advanced mechanism design v. 2: Analysis and syn-thesis . Prentice-Hall, 1984. [3] Hamilton H Mabie and Charles F Reinholtz. Mechanisms and dynamics of machinery . John Wiley & Sons, 1991. [4] Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza. “Case-based reasoning: Foundational issues, methodological variations, and system approaches”. In: AI communications 7.1 (1994), pp. 39–59. [5] Feng Lu and Evangelos Milios. “Robot pose estimation in unknown environments by matching 2d range scans”. In: Journal of Intelligent and Robotic systems 18 (1997), pp. 249–275. [6] Oleg Vinogradov. Fundamentals of kinematics and dynamics of machines and mechanisms . CRC press, 2000. [7] Arthur G.. Erdman, George N.. Sandor, and Sridhar Kota. Mechanism design: analysis and synthesis . Prentice Hall, 2001. [8] Ignacio E Grossmann. “Review of nonlinear mixed-integer and disjunctive programming tech-niques”. In: Optimization and engineering 3.3 (2002), pp. 227–252. [9] Martin Philip Bendsoe and Ole Sigmund. Topology optimization: theory, methods, and applica-tions . Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. [10] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations”. In: Journal of Computational physics 378 (2019), pp. 686–707. [11] Swarat Chaudhuri et al. “Neurosymbolic programming”. In: Foundations and Trends ® in Pro-gramming Languages 7.3 (2021), pp. 158–243. [12] Reiichiro Nakano et al. “Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332 (2021). [13] Shunyu Yao et al. “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models”. In: The eleventh international conference on learning representations . 2022. [14] Anthony Brohan et al. “Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances”. In: Conference on robot learning . PMLR. 2023, pp. 287–318. [15] Richardos Drakoulis. Iterative Closest Point . https://github.com/richardos/icp . Accessed: 2025-05-19. 2023. [16] Artur d’Avila Garcez and Luis C Lamb. “Neurosymbolic ai: The 3 rd wave”. In: Artificial Intelligence Review 56.11 (2023), pp. 12387–12406. [17] Sumin Lee, Jihoon Kim, and Namwoo Kang. “Deep generative model-based synthesis of four-bar linkage mechanisms considering both kinematic and dynamic conditions”. In: International Design Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Con-ference . Vol. 87301. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 2023, V03AT03A016. [18] Timo Schick et al. “Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools”. In: Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), pp. 68539–68551. [19] Yongliang Shen et al. “Hugginggpt: Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), pp. 38154–38180. [20] AI@Meta. “Llama 3 Model Card”. In: (2024). url : https://github.com/meta-llama/llama-models/blob/main/models/llama3_3/MODEL_CARD.md .20 [21] Hugo Farajallah. pylinkage: Python linkage builder and optimizer . https : / / github . com / HugoFara / pylinkage . GitHub repository (v0.6.0, released Oct 2 2024; accessed 2025-12-06); This work is licensed under the MIT License https://github.com/HugoFara/pylinkage/ blob/main/LICENSE . 2024. [22] Sumin Lee, Jihoon Kim, and Namwoo Kang. “Deep generative model-based synthesis framework of four-bar linkage mechanisms with target conditions”. In: Journal of Computational Design and Engineering 11.5 (2024), pp. 318–332. [23] Spyridon Mouselinos, Henryk Michalewski, and Mateusz Malinowski. “Beyond Lines and Circles: Unveiling the Geometric Reasoning Gap in Large Language Models”. In: Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 . Ed. by Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen. Miami, Florida, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2024, pp. 6192–6222. doi : 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-emnlp.360 . url : https://aclanthology. org/2024.findings-emnlp.360/ .[24] Enrique Soriano-Heras, Carlos P´ erez-Carrera, and Higinio Rubio. “Mathematical Dimensional Synthesis of Four-Bar Linkages Based on Cognate Mechanisms”. In: Mathematics 13.1 (2024), p. 11. [25] Jo˜ ao Pedro Gandarela et al. Controlled Agentic Planning & Reasoning for Mechanism Synthesis .2025. arXiv: 2505.17607 [cs.AI] . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17607 .[26] Woon Ryong Kim et al. “Data-Driven Dimensional Synthesis of Diverse Planar Four-bar Func-tion Generation Mechanisms via Direct Parameterization”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.08269 

(2025). [27] Jiong Lin et al. “Creative Synthesis of Kinematic Mechanisms”. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Creative AI Track: Humanity . 2025. url :

https://openreview.net/forum?id=EZkJtXJbtZ .[28] Qwen Team. Qwen3 . Apr. 2025. url : https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen3/ .21 A Supplementary Information 

A.1 Formal Definitions 

Definition A.1: Intent I

An intent I is a short natural-language description (optionally with example traces) specifying the desired motion goal. 

Definition A.2: End-effector trace p

The end-effector trace is the sampled planar trajectory p = ( p0, . . . , pN ) with pi ∈ R2, produced by running the candidate mechanism in the simulator. 

Definition A.3: Optimiser output p⋆(T )

For a fixed topology T , the optimiser returns 

p⋆(T ) ∈ arg min   

> p∈P (T)

L τ (T, p ), τ ⋆,

where τ (T, p ) is the realised trajectory, τ ⋆ the target, P(T ) the feasible parameter domain, and 

L the task loss (Chamfer distance). 

Proposition A.1: Existence of optimiser solution 

Under standard regularity conditions ( P(T ) non-empty and compact, L continuous in p), the argmin is non-empty. Hence p⋆(T ) exists. 

Definition A.4: Representation bundle R

The representation bundle R is the set of symbolic descriptions consumed by the LLM agents. It collects motion labels, detected events, structural diagnostics, and temporal predicates derived from the simulator output: 

R =  {q(t)}t, events ⊆ E , {Li}i, {pj }j , {Φk}k

,

where {Li}i denotes discrete motion labels and segmentation summaries. 

Definition A.5: Symbolic lifting operator L

L is the operator that maps an end-effector trajectory (or its sample proxy) together with simulator diagnostics to the compact representation bundle R used by downstream agents: 

L :  γ {pi}, sim msg  7 −→ R .

22 Proposition A.2: Soundness of symbolic lifting 

If a simulator trace satisfies a high-confidence property (e.g., “entirely in region R” or “contains an inflection at time t”) with sufficient margin above detection thresholds, then the corresponding lifted predicate appears in R. That is, strong geometric facts are faithfully preserved by the lifting operator L.

A.2 Discrete Segmental Representation 

From the sampled positions {pi} we form local kinematic proxies 

vi = pi+1 − pi, si = ∥vi∥2,

and capture local direction and angular change by 

θi = atan2( vi,y , v i,x ), ci = unwrap( θi+1 − θi) .

Headings are quantised di = [ θi]Π and the instantaneous motion is mapped to labels Li ∈ { Pause , Straight , Gentle Turn , Shar 

using interpretable thresholds ( τpause , τ straight , τ turn , . . . ). Runs of identical labels collapse the raw trace into segments, and for each segment the lifting records dominant heading, dominant curvature sign, label frequency, mean run length, transition counts and label-sequence entropy. 

A.3 Compositional Lifting: Qualitative Observables 

From the sampled trajectory points {pi}, discrete velocity vi and acceleration ai vectors are computed using centred finite difference approximations. The instantaneous observables, speed vi and geometric curvature κi, are: 

vi = ∥vi∥2, κi = ˙xi ¨yi − ˙yi ¨xi

( ˙ x2 

> i

+ ˙ y2 

> i

)3/2 .

Velocities are estimated by first-order finite differences: forward/backward at boundaries, centred for interior samples: 

vi ≈



(p1 − p0)/∆t, i = 0 ,

(pi+1 − pi−1)/(2∆ t), 0 < i < n − 1,

(pn−1 − pn−2)/∆t, i = n − 1.

Accelerations are obtained from second-order finite differences: 

ai ≈ pi+1 − 2pi + pi−1

∆t2 .

Applying hysteresis produces a noise-robust signature: the hysteretic sign function yields curvature polarity sκ,i = sgn ϵ(κi) and velocity-monotonicity components mx,i , m y,i .

Definition A.6: Qualitative signature q(t)The qualitative signature q(t) is the tuple of pointwise tokens 

q(t) =   sκ(t), m x(t), m y (t),

where sκ is the hysteretic curvature polarity, and mx, m y are velocity monotonicity components. 23 Definition A.7: Event alphabet E

E is the finite set of atomic events: INF (inflection, hysteretic zero-crossing of κ), EX x, EX y

(coordinate extrema), SINT (self-intersection), region relations in /out /cross, and guard crossings. Each is time-stamped. 

Definition A.8: Feature primitive p

A feature primitive is a compact interval descriptor: 

p = curv ∈ {− 1, 0, +1 }, mono ∈ {− 1, +1 }2, len ∈ R≥0 ∪ {∗} , ev ⊆ E .

Proposition A.3: Compositionality and robustness of sketches 

Let sketches be formed by concatenating primitives under majority statistics and hysteresis. Then: 1. The concatenation of primitives yields sketches whose qualitative event ordering and domi-nant curvature signs coincide with the concatenation of the primitives’ qualitative signatures (compositionality). 2. If the original numeric trajectory is perturbed by ∆ with ∥∆∥∞ ≤ ϵ and the hysteresis margins exceed ϵ, then the resulting sketch is unchanged (robustness). 

A.4 Temporal Logic Operators 

Events and primitives are mapped into bounded temporal logic formulas: 

Definition A.9: Bounded temporal operators 

F[a,b ]φ (eventually in [ a, b ]), G[a,b ]φ (always in [ a, b ]), and φ U[a,b ] ψ (until within [ a, b ]): 

F[a,b ] φ : ∃t′ ∈ [a, b ] with φ true. 

G[a,b ] φ : ∀t′ ∈ [a, b ], φ true. 

φ U [a,b ] ψ : ∃t′ ∈ [a, b ] with ψ true and ∀t′′ ∈ [0 , t ′], φ true. Example formula: Φ ≡ F[0 ,0.4] (in( RA)) ∧ F[0 .4,0.7] (curv = 0) ∧ (¬cross( Lx) U[0 .7,1.0] in( RB )) .

A.5 Agent Formal Definitions 

Definition A.10: Topology Agent mapping ftopology 

ftopology 

 M, n bars , {pi}, mem , exs  7 → (T, p init , rationale ).

24 Definition A.11: Simulation Critic mapping fcritic 

fcritic :  (T, p ), sim mes , L, DOF , TA response , R 7 −→ rtext .

Definition A.12: Refinement Planner mapping fplan 

fplan :  TA response , (T, p ), r text , failure table , mem  7 −→ O, 

where O = { failure mode , structural cause , suggested action }.

Definition A.13: Refinement operator Frefine 

Frefine 



(T, p ), O, sim mes , L, DOF , R, mem , api doc 



→  (T ′, p ′), chg rationale , reuse notes .

Proposition A.4: Bounded improvement of the closed-loop 

Assume each refinement plan O selected by the planner enforces either (a) a change that resolves a certificate-flagged hard constraint, or (b) a minimal parametric/topological edit which the opti-miser re-fits to locally minimise L. Under a minimal-change heuristic and assuming the optimiser attains p⋆(T ) for each proposed topology, the loop yields a sequence of candidate designs whose task loss is non-increasing across accepted iterations, and any accepted edit resolving a hard violation strictly reduces the set of outstanding certificate failures. 

A.6 Experimental Thresholds 

For the discrete segmental representation, trajectory segments were classified based on heading devia-tions: 2 ◦ for straight paths, 30 ◦ for gentle turns, and 45 ◦ for sharp turns. Velocities below 1 .5 × 10 −4

were categorised as pauses. For the compositional lifting, the simulation time step was ∆ t = 1 .0. A tolerance of 10 −3 was used for identifying zero curvature and sign changes. Guard crossings were validated using a minimum normal velocity of 10 −4 and a sample separation of 5. Self-intersection (SINT) events used a stochastic sampling strategy retaining 10% of detected intersections to avoid pathologically verbose descriptions. The temporal logic synthesis employed half-sample padding for event windows and an interval merging tolerance of 10 −12 .At each optimisation iteration, three candidate mechanisms were drawn; search used Rmax = 10 and ϵ = 0 .005. For Qwen (4B parameters), Rmax was increased to 20. 

# B Qualitative Analysis 

This section provides a qualitative visual assessment of the end-effector trajectories generated by our method for each of the six benchmark motion targets. Figures 7–9 compare the synthesised trajectories, produced by different model and optimiser combinations, against the corresponding target curves. Each figure juxtaposes one or two generated outputs (left and centre panels) with the ground-truth target (right panel), enabling direct visual evaluation of geometric fidelity. 25 Close inspection of the generated trajectories reveals several noteworthy characteristics. First, the method captures global shape structure: topological features such as closure, symmetry, and curvature sign are correctly reproduced and align well with target specifications across all test cases. Second, local geometric features are preserved with fidelity in the majority of outputs. The NACA airfoil examples (Figure 7) are particularly illustrative: despite their parametric complexity, involving asymmetric camber and trailing-edge curvature, the generated mechanisms successfully approximate key visual signatures such as leading-edge sharpness and looping periodicity. The Lemniscate of Bernoulli results (Figure 7) demonstrate that the method handles self-intersecting curves, a particularly challenging class of targets for linkage synthesis. The Line (Figure 9) results confirm effective performance on open curves with low curvature, while the Ellipse (Figure 9) results show that the method generalises to closed, smooth curves with varying aspect ratios. These visual results corroborate the quantitative findings reported in Section 2: the modular architecture, combined with symbolic lifting, produces mechanisms whose end-effector paths closely follow the target curves across a diverse set of geometric profiles. The consistency across different model families and optimiser choices reinforces the conclusion that the symbolic representation interface, rather than any particular model, is the primary enabler of geometric fidelity. 

How to read the mechanism plots. Each visualisation shows the synthesised planar linkage at a representative configuration of its motion cycle. Thin lines represent the rigid links (bars) that constitute the mechanism’s skeleton; their connectivity encodes the topology proposed by the language model agent. Thick lines trace the complete trajectories swept by each joint as the crank completes one full rotation. Different colours identify different joints: each joint in the mechanism traces a distinct coupler curve, and the colour distinguishes which trajectory belongs to which joint. The end-effector joint, whose trajectory is intended to approximate the target curve, is highlighted by the thickest and most prominently coloured trace. Where a target curve is shown in the right-hand panel, it is plotted in black for reference. 26 (a) Qwen3 MoE with PSO. (b) Llama with Grid search. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4  

> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4

(c) Target NACA profile (ground truth). This is the desired curve the mech-anism should trace, it is not a synthesised output. 

(d) Qwen3 MoE with PSO. (e) Llama with Grid search. 15 10 5 0 5 10 15  

> 6
> 4
> 2
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6

(f) Target LB curve (ground truth). This is the desired curve, not a synthesised mech-anism. 

Figure 7: NACA airfoil and Lemniscate of Bernoulli synthesis results. Thin lines : rigid bars of the mechanism. Thick coloured lines : full-cycle joint trajectories; different colours correspond to different joints, with the end-effector trace being the most prominent. Panel 7c is the ground-truth target curve that the synthesised mechanisms in 7a and 7b are approximating, it shows the ideal NACA profile, not a generated mechanism. The generated trajectories (7a, 7b) capture the asymmetric camber and trailing-edge curvature of the target profile 7c. Both model–optimiser combinations reproduce the global airfoil silhouette, with the leading-edge curvature and overall loop closure closely matching the target. Minor deviations appear in local curvature near inflection regions, but the overall geometric fidelity is high, confirming that the method can synthesise mechanisms that approximate complex parametric curves. Panel 7f is the ground-truth target curve , the ideal Lemniscate of Bernoulli that the mechanisms in 7d and 7e are reproducing, not an output of the method. This target is a self-intersecting figure-eight curve, which requires the mechanism to produce a trajectory that crosses itself. Both generated outputs (7d, 7e) reproduce the characteristic double-loop topology and a crossing point, demonstrating that the pipeline can synthesise linkages for self-intersecting targets. 27 (a) Qwen3 MoE with PSO. 40 20 0 20 40  

> 0
> 500
> 1000
> 1500
> 2000
> 2500

(b) Target parabolic arc (ground truth). This is the desired curve, not a synthesised mechanism. 

Figure 8: Parabola synthesis results. Thin lines : rigid bars of the linkage. Thick coloured lines :full-cycle joint trajectories; each colour identifies a distinct joint, and the end-effector trace is the most prominent. Panel (b) is the ground-truth target curve , the ideal parabolic arc the mechanism in (a) should trace, not an output of the method. The generated trajectory (a) approximates this parabolic arc with correct global curvature sign and vertex placement. Open curves present a specific challenge for linkage synthesis because the end-effector of a rotary-driven mechanism inherently produces closed paths. 28 (a) Qwen with Grid search. (b) Llama with Grid search. 6.00 6.25 6.50 6.75 7.00 7.25 7.50 7.75 8.00  

> 5.0
> 4.8
> 4.6
> 4.4
> 4.2
> 4.0

(c) Target straight line (ground truth). 

This is the desired curve, not a synthesised mechanism. 

(d) Qwen3 MoE with PSO (sample 1). (e) Qwen3 MoE with PSO (sample 2). 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14  

> 1
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5

(f) Target ellipse (ground truth). This is the desired curve, not a synthesised mecha-nism. 

Figure 9: Straight-line and ellipse synthesis results. Thin lines : rigid bars of the linkage. Thick coloured lines : full-cycle joint trajectories; colours distinguish joints, with the end-effector trace being the most prominent. Panels (a)-(c) show straight-line synthesis: panel (c) is the ground-truth target curve , the ideal straight-line segment that panels (a) and (b) approximate. The generated trajectories achieve linear paths, and the 4B-parameter Qwen result is comparable to the 70B-parameter Llama result, supporting the finding that the symbolic interface, rather than model scale, is the primary driver of design quality; this target achieved the largest Chamfer distance reduction (67.7%) in Table 2. Panels (d)-(f) show ellipse synthesis: panel (f) is the ground-truth target curve , and panels (d) and (e) are two independent samples from the same model-optimiser configuration, illustrating output diversity. Both samples capture a closed smooth elliptical profile while differing in aspect ratio and orientation, consistent with stochastic topology exploration and subsequent continuous fitting. 29 C Full table 

C.1 High-budget Enum+GA vs. Symbolic (60 ×300) 

> 30

Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Llama LB Grid No No No 6.529 ± 0.450 5.400 ± 1.631 17 .875 0.885 ± 0.010 6.520 ± 0.138 2.200 ± 0.183 Llama LB Grid No No Yes 6.145 ± 0.494 6.000 ± 1.817 16 .207 0.883 ± 0.052 6.880 ± 0.142 2.360 ± 0.166 Llama LB Grid No Yes No 6.792 ± 0.167 5.200 ± 1.319 14 .742 1.013 ± 0.057 6.727 ± 0.160 2.341 ± 0.203 Llama LB Grid No Yes Yes 5.966 ± 0.366 6.000 ± 1.517 26 .488 0.983 ± 0.019 7.040 ± 0.143 2.800 ± 0.137 Llama LB Grid Yes No No 6.322 ± 0.619 4.600 ± 1.208 15 .399 0.846 ± 0.078 8.280 ± 0.323 3.790 ± 0.776 Llama LB Grid Yes No Yes 6.836 ± 0.540 3.400 ± 1.288 17 .190 1.019 ± 0.123 7.200 ± 0.181 2.330 ± 0.669 Llama LB Grid Yes Yes No 6.581 ± 0.600 5.600 ± 1.691 23 .985 1.097 ± 0.135 6.800 ± 0.171 2.050 ± 0.708 Llama LB Grid Yes Yes Yes 6.022 ± 0.643 4.800 ± 1.562 27 .508 0.983 ± 0.078 7.320 ± 0.211 2.510 ± 0.701 Llama LB Pso No No No 8.653 ± 0.571 5.000 ± 0.837 7.852 0.852 ± 0.025 6.500 ± 0.167 2.040 ± 0.140 Llama LB Pso No No Yes 8.736 ± 0.554 4.400 ± 1.400 5.666 0.915 ± 0.054 6.720 ± 0.149 2.340 ± 0.168 Llama LB Pso No Yes No 8.791 ± 0.589 7.000 ± 1.643 6.749 1.001 ± 0.108 7.440 ± 0.162 3.040 ± 0.162 Llama LB Pso No Yes Yes 8.621 ± 0.416 4.000 ± 1.304 6.943 0.924 ± 0.030 6.640 ± 0.145 2.160 ± 0.163 Llama LB Pso Yes No No 8.807 ± 0.487 4.800 ± 1.241 6.899 0.862 ± 0.037 6.720 ± 0.179 2.170 ± 0.674 Llama LB Pso Yes No Yes 8.626 ± 0.546 7.800 ± 0.583 10 .785 0.904 ± 0.038 7.160 ± 0.190 2.690 ± 0.679 Llama LB Pso Yes Yes No 8.689 ± 0.419 4.400 ± 1.400 8.121 0.908 ± 0.143 6.600 ± 0.237 2.210 ± 0.729 Llama LB Pso Yes Yes Yes 8.687 ± 0.441 4.400 ± 1.400 8.756 0.930 ± 0.031 7.380 ± 0.235 2.530 ± 0.748 Llama Circle Grid No No No 1.735 ± 0.500 4.600 ± 1.503 58 .708 1.047 ± 0.093 6.640 ± 0.133 2.180 ± 0.178 Llama Circle Grid No No Yes 1.506 ± 0.559 8.400 ± 0.812 64 .091 0.892 ± 0.021 6.600 ± 0.143 2.320 ± 0.158 Llama Circle Grid No Yes No 1.674 ± 0.545 7.400 ± 1.435 75 .051 1.057 ± 0.150 6.560 ± 0.152 2.120 ± 0.150 Llama Circle Grid No Yes Yes 1.663 ± 0.522 5.800 ± 1.114 70 .053 0.991 ± 0.056 7.040 ± 0.174 2.560 ± 0.194 Llama Circle Grid Yes No No 1.768 ± 0.508 7.200 ± 1.200 69 .799 0.954 ± 0.079 7.120 ± 0.173 2.910 ± 0.669 Llama Circle Grid Yes No Yes 1.797 ± 0.453 8.400 ± 0.400 68 .511 0.981 ± 0.087 7.280 ± 0.196 2.650 ± 0.692 Llama Circle Grid Yes Yes No 1.711 ± 0.409 4.800 ± 1.594 80 .335 0.907 ± 0.023 6.680 ± 0.168 1.750 ± 0.664 Llama Circle Grid Yes Yes Yes 1.579 ± 0.451 6.000 ± 1.183 68 .959 1.010 ± 0.103 7.140 ± 0.232 2.550 ± 0.714 Llama Circle Pso No No No 7.458 ± 3.203 8.000 ± 1.304 40 .772 1.321 ± 0.125 7.120 ± 0.142 2.920 ± 0.140 Llama Circle Pso No No Yes 6.221 ± 2.962 8.400 ± 0.678 59 .205 0.988 ± 0.177 6.400 ± 0.214 2.420 ± 0.176 Llama Circle Pso No Yes No 5.774 ± 2.124 4.400 ± 1.122 39 .765 0.743 ± 0.125 6.500 ± 0.174 2.208 ± 0.157 Llama Circle Pso No Yes Yes 7.079 ± 2.873 6.000 ± 1.265 47 .922 1.183 ± 0.205 7.200 ± 0.181 3.060 ± 0.199 Llama Circle Pso Yes No No 5.337 ± 3.050 8.200 ± 0.860 60 .163 0.950 ± 0.083 6.960 ± 0.154 2.750 ± 0.662 Llama Circle Pso Yes No Yes 7.415 ± 3.334 8.000 ± 0.632 49 .773 0.845 ± 0.136 7.180 ± 0.201 2.610 ± 0.714 Llama Circle Pso Yes Yes No 5.647 ± 2.594 5.000 ± 1.342 57 .373 1.020 ± 0.151 6.280 ± 0.229 1.970 ± 0.692 Llama Circle Pso Yes Yes Yes 4.872 ± 2.358 7.000 ± 1.643 56 .011 0.893 ± 0.180 6.760 ± 0.228 2.110 ± 0.704 Llama Ellipse Grid No No No 2.045 ± 0.264 7.200 ± 1.463 39 .963 1.079 ± 0.067 6.320 ± 0.165 2.040 ± 0.169 Llama Ellipse Grid No No Yes 2.224 ± 0.276 7.200 ± 0.490 37 .106 1.005 ± 0.032 7.440 ± 0.190 3.120 ± 0.187 Llama Ellipse Grid No Yes No 1.985 ± 0.297 6.600 ± 0.980 53 .581 0.929 ± 0.017 6.520 ± 0.170 2.460 ± 0.162 Llama Ellipse Grid No Yes Yes 2.036 ± 0.203 3.600 ± 1.030 43 .973 1.093 ± 0.203 6.520 ± 0.149 2.160 ± 0.165 Llama Ellipse Grid Yes No No 2.081 ± 0.373 6.800 ± 1.463 46 .470 0.959 ± 0.012 6.740 ± 0.142 2.330 ± 0.654 Llama Ellipse Grid Yes No Yes 2.648 ± 0.451 4.000 ± 1.761 38 .017 1.007 ± 0.117 7.680 ± 0.175 2.830 ± 0.673 Llama Ellipse Grid Yes Yes No 2.511 ± 0.219 5.600 ± 1.568 20 .566 0.870 ± 0.049 6.880 ± 0.173 1.970 ± 0.694 Llama Ellipse Grid Yes Yes Yes 2.167 ± 0.186 5.800 ± 1.356 35 .519 0.900 ± 0.025 6.600 ± 0.208 1.930 ± 0.701 Llama Ellipse Pso No No No 4.326 ± 0.631 8.400 ± 0.678 23 .547 0.965 ± 0.018 6.680 ± 0.135 2.440 ± 0.128 Llama Ellipse Pso No No Yes 4.364 ± 0.811 4.800 ± 1.562 31 .403 0.938 ± 0.028 6.080 ± 0.171 1.780 ± 0.144 Llama Ellipse Pso No Yes No 4.424 ± 0.683 7.000 ± 1.049 28 .519 0.995 ± 0.098 6.480 ± 0.135 2.060 ± 0.135 Llama Ellipse Pso No Yes Yes 4.350 ± 0.647 6.000 ± 1.304 27 .886 1.133 ± 0.097 7.560 ± 0.154 3.200 ± 0.148 Llama Ellipse Pso Yes No No 4.834 ± 0.757 4.800 ± 1.594 26 .183 0.692 ± 0.062 7.143 ± 0.154 2.603 ± 0.688 Llama Ellipse Pso Yes No Yes 4.633 ± 0.762 7.800 ± 0.735 24 .938 1.218 ± 0.215 7.000 ± 0.174 2.690 ± 0.675 Llama Ellipse Pso Yes Yes No 4.064 ± 0.557 4.400 ± 2.088 33 .918 0.938 ± 0.053 6.160 ± 0.188 1.470 ± 0.672 Llama Ellipse Pso Yes Yes Yes 4.801 ± 0.761 4.200 ± 0.917 20 .608 0.803 ± 0.057 6.680 ± 0.177 2.090 ± 0.661 

Table 5: Full results for Llama on LB, circle, and ellipse targets. Columns: Opt = optimiser (Grid search or PSO) Best chamf. = lowest Chamfer distance achieved across all reflection steps (mean 

± standard error); Steps = number of reflection iterations taken for the best result; % Imp. =percentage reduction in Chamfer distance relative to the initial proposal; % Semantic = fraction of valid outputs; Links = number of rigid bars in the synthesised mechanism; Goal links = difference between synthesised and specified target link count. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 31 Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Llama Line Grid No No No 0.966 ± 0.476 7.200 ± 0.970 75 .784 1.004 ± 0.105 6.640 ± 0.166 2.460 ± 0.170 Llama Line Grid No No Yes 0.639 ± 0.307 8.800 ± 0.970 88 .625 0.908 ± 0.060 6.920 ± 0.269 2.840 ± 0.240 Llama Line Grid No Yes No 0.565 ± 0.148 6.800 ± 0.970 85 .248 0.962 ± 0.054 7.000 ± 0.183 2.600 ± 0.167 Llama Line Grid No Yes Yes 0.725 ± 0.275 6.200 ± 1.497 88 .154 0.982 ± 0.148 7.360 ± 0.202 3.080 ± 0.198 Llama Line Grid Yes No No 0.804 ± 0.522 6.400 ± 1.435 82 .707 1.018 ± 0.075 6.640 ± 0.185 2.170 ± 0.686 Llama Line Grid Yes No Yes 0.533 ± 0.266 7.600 ± 1.470 77 .970 0.863 ± 0.074 7.200 ± 0.181 2.610 ± 0.662 Llama Line Grid Yes Yes No 0.606 ± 0.302 3.600 ± 1.030 86 .842 0.953 ± 0.118 7.840 ± 0.220 3.270 ± 0.716 Llama Line Grid Yes Yes Yes 0.581 ± 0.195 5.200 ± 0.860 87 .537 1.003 ± 0.088 6.880 ± 0.207 2.170 ± 0.696 Llama Line Pso No No No 4.364 ± 1.428 5.400 ± 0.510 54 .639 0.977 ± 0.108 6.600 ± 0.154 2.500 ± 0.162 Llama Line Pso No No Yes 3.076 ± 1.452 7.600 ± 1.030 64 .395 0.891 ± 0.140 6.840 ± 0.152 2.640 ± 0.142 Llama Line Pso No Yes No 1.946 ± 1.270 6.000 ± 1.483 76 .289 0.814 ± 0.095 6.440 ± 0.200 2.180 ± 0.171 Llama Line Pso No Yes Yes 2.480 ± 1.314 7.400 ± 1.778 64 .823 0.743 ± 0.130 6.208 ± 0.240 2.271 ± 0.212 Llama Line Pso Yes No No 4.712 ± 2.004 6.200 ± 1.393 51 .459 0.748 ± 0.093 6.640 ± 0.176 2.210 ± 0.673 Llama Line Pso Yes No Yes 3.278 ± 1.533 7.200 ± 0.800 68 .779 0.843 ± 0.068 6.680 ± 0.211 2.310 ± 0.692 Llama Line Pso Yes Yes No 3.767 ± 1.320 6.200 ± 1.393 59 .639 0.936 ± 0.094 6.880 ± 0.191 2.550 ± 0.685 Llama Line Pso Yes Yes Yes 2.252 ± 1.507 6.600 ± 0.980 76 .992 0.722 ± 0.076 6.080 ± 0.206 1.690 ± 0.705 Llama Naca Grid No No No 0.441 ± 0.101 5.600 ± 1.208 38 .649 1.007 ± 0.050 7.680 ± 0.144 3.020 ± 0.165 Llama Naca Grid No No Yes 0.389 ± 0.139 4.000 ± 1.000 58 .292 1.013 ± 0.120 7.960 ± 0.156 3.480 ± 0.170 Llama Naca Grid No Yes No 0.312 ± 0.066 3.800 ± 1.158 59 .191 0.906 ± 0.035 7.360 ± 0.193 3.000 ± 0.167 Llama Naca Grid No Yes Yes 0.397 ± 0.110 5.400 ± 1.364 61 .467 0.972 ± 0.148 7.640 ± 0.204 3.280 ± 0.192 Llama Naca Grid Yes No No 0.397 ± 0.131 4.600 ± 1.503 50 .315 0.898 ± 0.027 7.720 ± 0.190 3.090 ± 0.723 Llama Naca Grid Yes No Yes 0.399 ± 0.134 6.400 ± 1.691 60 .472 0.933 ± 0.039 7.840 ± 0.188 3.090 ± 0.701 Llama Naca Grid Yes Yes No 0.483 ± 0.107 5.400 ± 1.208 42 .237 0.998 ± 0.102 8.120 ± 0.175 3.430 ± 0.688 Llama Naca Grid Yes Yes Yes 0.357 ± 0.120 5.800 ± 1.530 51 .604 0.942 ± 0.068 7.320 ± 0.168 2.590 ± 0.692 Llama Naca Pso No No No 0.787 ± 0.359 6.800 ± 1.594 44 .268 0.867 ± 0.036 7.120 ± 0.163 2.940 ± 0.175 Llama Naca Pso No No Yes 0.732 ± 0.329 7.000 ± 1.000 44 .496 0.828 ± 0.024 7.200 ± 0.190 2.880 ± 0.182 Llama Naca Pso No Yes No 0.466 ± 0.182 4.800 ± 1.356 46 .681 0.896 ± 0.127 7.660 ± 0.253 3.213 ± 0.227 Llama Naca Pso No Yes Yes 0.633 ± 0.254 4.800 ± 0.860 44 .777 1.125 ± 0.130 7.640 ± 0.195 3.440 ± 0.204 Llama Naca Pso Yes No No 0.559 ± 0.205 4.000 ± 1.342 32 .515 1.078 ± 0.094 7.680 ± 0.165 3.250 ± 0.679 Llama Naca Pso Yes No Yes 0.638 ± 0.304 4.800 ± 1.497 45 .338 1.089 ± 0.175 8.000 ± 0.171 3.270 ± 0.667 Llama Naca Pso Yes Yes No 0.386 ± 0.165 6.800 ± 1.530 63 .629 1.031 ± 0.207 7.600 ± 0.236 2.930 ± 0.707 Llama Naca Pso Yes Yes Yes 0.608 ± 0.268 6.200 ± 1.200 45 .657 0.911 ± 0.143 6.880 ± 0.207 2.150 ± 0.683 Llama Parabola Grid No No No 688 .191 ± 31 .323 7.000 ± 1.342 21 .954 0.997 ± 0.098 7.120 ± 0.199 2.720 ± 0.192 Llama Parabola Grid No No Yes 688 .919 ± 34 .117 7.200 ± 0.800 19 .430 1.025 ± 0.152 7.160 ± 0.152 2.920 ± 0.151 Llama Parabola Grid No Yes No 797 .121 ± 47 .780 7.400 ± 1.691 6.953 0.955 ± 0.058 7.200 ± 0.171 2.940 ± 0.175 Llama Parabola Grid No Yes Yes 752 .773 ± 28 .310 7.600 ± 0.510 15 .314 0.905 ± 0.038 6.480 ± 0.203 2.460 ± 0.174 Llama Parabola Grid Yes No No 696 .402 ± 76 .192 7.800 ± 1.020 20 .990 1.080 ± 0.125 6.720 ± 0.159 2.350 ± 0.659 Llama Parabola Grid Yes No Yes 728 .409 ± 25 .214 7.200 ± 0.860 17 .713 0.882 ± 0.032 7.200 ± 0.181 2.530 ± 0.657 Llama Parabola Grid Yes Yes No 799 .059 ± 52 .367 5.400 ± 1.288 10 .327 0.862 ± 0.034 6.640 ± 0.166 2.050 ± 0.667 Llama Parabola Grid Yes Yes Yes 792 .749 ± 42 .745 6.800 ± 1.428 10 .604 0.981 ± 0.136 6.880 ± 0.215 2.350 ± 0.714 Llama Parabola Pso No No No 887 .541 ± 25 .010 5.600 ± 0.510 0.823 1.007 ± 0.137 6.800 ± 0.151 2.620 ± 0.143 Llama Parabola Pso No No Yes 885 .810 ± 23 .119 7.000 ± 0.707 1.029 0.837 ± 0.050 5.800 ± 0.230 1.960 ± 0.169 Llama Parabola Pso No Yes No 889 .441 ± 24 .337 7.200 ± 1.068 0.628 0.796 ± 0.046 6.960 ± 0.143 2.580 ± 0.151 Llama Parabola Pso No Yes Yes 890 .400 ± 25 .080 6.000 ± 1.612 0.394 0.865 ± 0.101 7.120 ± 0.182 2.700 ± 0.184 Llama Parabola Pso Yes No No 890 .007 ± 24 .088 5.200 ± 0.970 0.470 0.906 ± 0.134 7.320 ± 0.186 2.850 ± 0.694 Llama Parabola Pso Yes No Yes 889 .856 ± 24 .576 6.200 ± 1.463 0.523 0.851 ± 0.164 6.762 ± 0.166 2.083 ± 0.662 Llama Parabola Pso Yes Yes No 889 .138 ± 24 .168 4.000 ± 1.378 0.739 0.785 ± 0.050 6.520 ± 0.212 1.850 ± 0.712 Llama Parabola Pso Yes Yes Yes 888 .016 ± 23 .356 7.600 ± 1.364 0.837 0.904 ± 0.036 6.120 ± 0.231 1.810 ± 0.707 

Table 6: Full results for Llama on straight-line, NACA airfoil, and parabola targets. Column definitions are the same as in Table 5. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 32 Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Qwen3 MoE LB Grid No No No 7.290 ± 0.471 3.400 ± 0.980 0.000 0.357 ± 0.082 6.000 ± 0.051 1.554 ± 0.105 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid No No Yes 6.859 ± 0.550 7.200 ± 1.241 8.688 0.495 ± 0.167 6.046 ± 0.060 1.462 ± 0.112 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid No Yes No 7.135 ± 0.600 4.800 ± 1.020 3.805 0.260 ± 0.077 5.934 ± 0.117 1.787 ± 0.117 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid No Yes Yes 4.861 ± 0.095 6.800 ± 1.068 37 .703 0.675 ± 0.179 6.342 ± 0.126 1.921 ± 0.140 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid Yes No No 6.953 ± 0.495 6.600 ± 1.327 20 .610 0.458 ± 0.162 5.794 ± 0.076 1.394 ± 0.590 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid Yes No Yes 7.045 ± 0.268 6.000 ± 1.581 7.712 0.498 ± 0.276 5.682 ± 0.121 1.098 ± 0.615 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid Yes Yes No 7.886 ± 0.483 4.800 ± 1.562 1.765 0.395 ± 0.125 6.095 ± 0.084 1.512 ± 0.615 Qwen3 MoE LB Grid Yes Yes Yes 6.918 ± 0.794 5.000 ± 1.183 4.605 0.435 ± 0.148 5.959 ± 0.041 1.271 ± 0.583 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso No No No 9.649 ± 0.379 6.200 ± 1.241 1.244 0.204 ± 0.039 5.929 ± 0.071 1.768 ± 0.057 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso No No Yes 9.439 ± 0.540 3.600 ± 1.208 1.759 0.412 ± 0.171 5.912 ± 0.045 1.579 ± 0.079 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso No Yes No 9.682 ± 0.456 3.400 ± 0.812 7.802 0.327 ± 0.054 6.016 ± 0.060 1.705 ± 0.089 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso No Yes Yes 9.553 ± 0.523 5.400 ± 1.327 0.831 0.296 ± 0.076 6.127 ± 0.062 1.921 ± 0.091 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso Yes No No 11 .424 ± 2.220 6.000 ± 1.140 9.779 0.333 ± 0.087 6.018 ± 0.054 1.682 ± 0.594 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso Yes No Yes 9.766 ± 0.464 5.800 ± 1.356 1.143 0.688 ± 0.195 6.000 ± 0.000 1.368 ± 0.573 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso Yes Yes No 9.516 ± 0.437 5.000 ± 1.304 0.000 0.153 ± 0.026 5.909 ± 0.075 1.368 ± 0.599 Qwen3 MoE LB Pso Yes Yes Yes 9.559 ± 0.425 5.200 ± 1.158 0.000 0.162 ± 0.044 5.982 ± 0.084 1.477 ± 0.588 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid No No No 1.808 ± 0.654 5.400 ± 0.678 4.215 0.335 ± 0.091 6.233 ± 0.117 1.717 ± 0.119 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid No No Yes 1.258 ± 0.537 4.200 ± 1.393 6.996 0.367 ± 0.128 6.050 ± 0.055 1.500 ± 0.110 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid No Yes No 5.497 ± 2.700 4.800 ± 1.625 26 .771 0.465 ± 0.156 5.905 ± 0.071 1.476 ± 0.084 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid No Yes Yes 2.013 ± 0.652 6.200 ± 2.131 16 .543 0.300 ± 0.057 6.000 ± 0.043 1.456 ± 0.090 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid Yes No No 3.825 ± 1.389 4.600 ± 1.208 2.862 0.204 ± 0.051 6.196 ± 0.123 1.700 ± 0.642 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid Yes No Yes 1.856 ± 0.550 4.400 ± 1.913 0.000 0.187 ± 0.031 6.036 ± 0.063 1.241 ± 0.616 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid Yes Yes No 2.192 ± 0.478 4.000 ± 1.673 17 .379 0.297 ± 0.040 5.929 ± 0.071 1.089 ± 0.615 Qwen3 MoE Circle Grid Yes Yes Yes 2.918 ± 1.672 6.800 ± 1.393 41 .734 0.509 ± 0.190 6.063 ± 0.101 1.337 ± 0.631 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso No No No 3.658 ± 1.028 6.200 ± 1.497 21 .006 0.683 ± 0.191 5.885 ± 0.094 1.574 ± 0.100 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso No No Yes 5.498 ± 3.262 6.400 ± 1.833 30 .854 0.723 ± 0.182 5.972 ± 0.078 1.549 ± 0.102 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso No Yes No 4.949 ± 2.281 7.600 ± 1.364 47 .531 0.970 ± 0.157 5.953 ± 0.033 1.506 ± 0.078 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso No Yes Yes 8.047 ± 4.067 6.600 ± 1.749 37 .524 0.517 ± 0.164 5.930 ± 0.058 1.521 ± 0.082 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso Yes No No 3.366 ± 0.869 6.000 ± 1.414 37 .633 0.746 ± 0.252 5.971 ± 0.029 1.597 ± 0.575 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso Yes No Yes 2.894 ± 1.345 6.600 ± 1.691 31 .505 0.542 ± 0.143 5.791 ± 0.078 1.347 ± 0.588 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso Yes Yes No 6.090 ± 3.232 4.200 ± 1.393 7.242 0.437 ± 0.099 6.000 ± 0.000 1.267 ± 0.593 Qwen3 MoE Circle Pso Yes Yes Yes 3.444 ± 1.260 5.000 ± 1.581 14 .536 0.363 ± 0.067 5.952 ± 0.107 1.337 ± 0.617 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid No No No 3.215 ± 0.391 4.000 ± 1.761 5.687 0.437 ± 0.063 5.902 ± 0.051 1.344 ± 0.099 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid No No Yes 4.469 ± 1.276 4.800 ± 0.860 12 .395 0.219 ± 0.034 6.000 ± 0.051 1.536 ± 0.105 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid No Yes No 3.799 ± 0.552 2.800 ± 0.735 10 .434 0.380 ± 0.158 5.931 ± 0.048 1.466 ± 0.089 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid No Yes Yes 2.709 ± 0.368 6.600 ± 1.400 19 .425 0.661 ± 0.136 6.076 ± 0.069 1.621 ± 0.112 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid Yes No No 3.592 ± 0.451 5.200 ± 1.158 7.466 0.189 ± 0.040 5.931 ± 0.073 1.381 ± 0.613 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid Yes No Yes 3.197 ± 0.586 4.200 ± 0.970 9.063 0.510 ± 0.156 5.918 ± 0.051 1.229 ± 0.587 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid Yes Yes No 3.031 ± 0.835 6.600 ± 0.678 38 .263 0.405 ± 0.124 5.917 ± 0.055 1.236 ± 0.593 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Grid Yes Yes Yes 3.046 ± 0.640 5.400 ± 1.600 7.528 0.346 ± 0.094 6.000 ± 0.000 1.219 ± 0.597 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso No No No 6.456 ± 1.330 5.000 ± 1.414 11 .438 0.730 ± 0.112 6.000 ± 0.040 1.681 ± 0.074 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso No No Yes 4.988 ± 0.643 5.600 ± 1.435 17 .625 0.714 ± 0.102 5.813 ± 0.092 1.427 ± 0.101 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso No Yes No 6.930 ± 1.319 5.200 ± 1.655 2.226 0.470 ± 0.153 6.018 ± 0.018 1.860 ± 0.053 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso No Yes Yes 5.483 ± 0.906 4.000 ± 1.000 0.000 0.420 ± 0.161 5.842 ± 0.093 1.579 ± 0.112 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso Yes No No 5.210 ± 0.861 4.000 ± 0.949 7.126 0.523 ± 0.191 5.848 ± 0.124 1.617 ± 0.611 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso Yes No Yes 5.935 ± 1.284 5.200 ± 1.356 11 .620 0.445 ± 0.189 5.847 ± 0.078 1.264 ± 0.595 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso Yes Yes No 5.408 ± 0.911 6.000 ± 0.837 6.555 0.687 ± 0.274 6.000 ± 0.037 1.303 ± 0.578 Qwen3 MoE Ellipse Pso Yes Yes Yes 5.395 ± 0.832 3.600 ± 1.600 10 .839 0.398 ± 0.108 5.971 ± 0.029 1.431 ± 0.567 

Table 7: Full results for Qwen3 MoE on Lemniscates of Bernoulli ( ∞), circle, and ellipse targets. Column definitions follow Table 5. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 33 Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Qwen3 MoE Line Grid No No No 2.884 ± 0.952 5.000 ± 1.517 16 .588 0.302 ± 0.066 5.982 ± 0.018 1.404 ± 0.090 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid No No Yes 2.435 ± 1.014 5.800 ± 1.594 20 .545 0.271 ± 0.070 6.079 ± 0.057 1.746 ± 0.088 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid No Yes No 1.956 ± 0.756 7.000 ± 1.378 62 .388 0.499 ± 0.091 5.681 ± 0.129 1.514 ± 0.095 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid No Yes Yes 2.338 ± 0.965 6.600 ± 1.122 19 .364 0.401 ± 0.121 5.935 ± 0.079 1.597 ± 0.107 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid Yes No No 2.191 ± 0.463 5.200 ± 1.428 0.000 0.254 ± 0.026 6.000 ± 0.051 1.646 ± 0.584 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid Yes No Yes 1.516 ± 0.446 7.000 ± 1.483 13 .224 0.312 ± 0.088 6.016 ± 0.072 1.439 ± 0.606 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid Yes Yes No 2.173 ± 0.804 6.400 ± 1.470 17 .818 0.182 ± 0.046 6.017 ± 0.077 1.500 ± 0.584 Qwen3 MoE Line Grid Yes Yes Yes 1.985 ± 1.026 4.400 ± 1.327 22 .324 0.440 ± 0.102 6.206 ± 0.104 1.588 ± 0.618 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso No No No 5.236 ± 1.588 3.400 ± 1.661 19 .718 0.533 ± 0.122 5.831 ± 0.097 1.746 ± 0.057 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso No No Yes 5.526 ± 2.195 5.000 ± 1.643 40 .439 0.450 ± 0.104 6.075 ± 0.039 1.672 ± 0.089 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso No Yes No 2.502 ± 0.743 8.000 ± 1.000 30 .642 0.745 ± 0.090 5.882 ± 0.065 1.539 ± 0.087 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso No Yes Yes 4.822 ± 1.372 4.000 ± 0.949 27 .008 0.504 ± 0.139 5.958 ± 0.042 1.493 ± 0.080 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso Yes No No 5.088 ± 2.062 4.800 ± 1.200 37 .829 0.718 ± 0.331 5.973 ± 0.027 1.580 ± 0.579 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso Yes No Yes 3.720 ± 1.320 4.800 ± 1.356 31 .619 0.534 ± 0.075 5.468 ± 0.121 0.851 ± 0.604 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso Yes Yes No 5.098 ± 1.628 4.200 ± 1.393 22 .057 0.441 ± 0.103 6.114 ± 0.059 1.593 ± 0.590 Qwen3 MoE Line Pso Yes Yes Yes 5.330 ± 2.232 6.000 ± 1.265 26 .217 0.637 ± 0.174 5.935 ± 0.047 1.269 ± 0.575 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid No No No 0.738 ± 0.312 4.000 ± 1.265 7.437 0.478 ± 0.160 6.094 ± 0.069 1.531 ± 0.111 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid No No Yes 0.294 ± 0.049 4.000 ± 0.548 18 .170 0.417 ± 0.102 6.032 ± 0.055 1.667 ± 0.082 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid No Yes No 0.816 ± 0.278 6.400 ± 1.288 7.359 0.406 ± 0.163 6.133 ± 0.090 1.717 ± 0.109 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid No Yes Yes 0.450 ± 0.126 7.800 ± 1.497 21 .612 0.545 ± 0.174 6.000 ± 0.045 1.562 ± 0.086 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid Yes No No 0.497 ± 0.175 3.800 ± 1.200 0.000 0.288 ± 0.073 6.086 ± 0.099 1.605 ± 0.624 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid Yes No Yes 0.354 ± 0.104 5.200 ± 0.800 15 .108 0.378 ± 0.057 6.209 ± 0.099 1.586 ± 0.616 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid Yes Yes No 0.764 ± 0.313 7.600 ± 1.030 11 .943 0.360 ± 0.123 6.200 ± 0.106 1.504 ± 0.616 Qwen3 MoE Naca Grid Yes Yes Yes 0.469 ± 0.096 2.600 ± 0.927 0.000 0.340 ± 0.088 5.930 ± 0.049 1.627 ± 0.556 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso No No No 0.908 ± 0.416 6.400 ± 0.510 11 .451 0.633 ± 0.066 6.083 ± 0.062 1.694 ± 0.088 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso No No Yes 1.033 ± 0.513 3.800 ± 0.970 16 .175 0.639 ± 0.132 6.045 ± 0.033 1.716 ± 0.082 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso No Yes No 0.923 ± 0.407 6.000 ± 1.612 9.208 0.776 ± 0.102 6.000 ± 0.060 1.836 ± 0.084 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso No Yes Yes 1.199 ± 0.570 2.800 ± 0.917 1.017 0.407 ± 0.150 6.018 ± 0.053 1.719 ± 0.086 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso Yes No No 0.814 ± 0.377 6.800 ± 1.393 23 .421 0.596 ± 0.041 6.195 ± 0.076 1.729 ± 0.599 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso Yes No Yes 1.056 ± 0.455 3.600 ± 1.030 5.512 0.400 ± 0.049 5.800 ± 0.091 1.317 ± 0.584 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso Yes Yes No 0.831 ± 0.400 5.000 ± 1.378 15 .199 0.522 ± 0.146 6.014 ± 0.057 1.449 ± 0.582 Qwen3 MoE Naca Pso Yes Yes Yes 0.700 ± 0.273 6.400 ± 1.288 22 .306 0.683 ± 0.191 6.110 ± 0.046 1.558 ± 0.575 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid No No No 881 .244 ± 25 .417 5.000 ± 1.924 0.677 0.432 ± 0.111 5.965 ± 0.025 1.509 ± 0.091 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid No No Yes 722 .703 ± 83 .052 6.400 ± 1.288 15 .111 0.557 ± 0.166 6.041 ± 0.090 1.671 ± 0.096 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid No Yes No 830 .956 ± 55 .665 2.600 ± 0.927 4.635 0.594 ± 0.136 6.172 ± 0.082 1.719 ± 0.090 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid No Yes Yes 790 .106 ± 63 .040 4.000 ± 1.673 10 .044 0.767 ± 0.235 6.307 ± 0.085 1.747 ± 0.122 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid Yes No No 772 .575 ± 57 .140 3.600 ± 1.249 9.106 0.699 ± 0.280 5.887 ± 0.055 1.527 ± 0.579 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid Yes No Yes 702 .749 ± 132 .429 5.600 ± 1.913 3.616 0.594 ± 0.118 5.761 ± 0.134 1.412 ± 0.598 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid Yes Yes No 821 .719 ± 65 .612 4.400 ± 1.691 7.400 0.515 ± 0.107 5.938 ± 0.099 1.234 ± 0.609 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Grid Yes Yes Yes 770 .787 ± 37 .359 5.800 ± 1.356 9.732 0.611 ± 0.126 6.013 ± 0.080 1.568 ± 0.582 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso No No No 894 .803 ± 24 .222 3.800 ± 1.114 0.000 0.262 ± 0.063 6.073 ± 0.073 1.873 ± 0.097 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso No No Yes 899 .069 ± 24 .509 5.000 ± 1.095 0.036 0.237 ± 0.045 5.982 ± 0.040 1.446 ± 0.105 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso No Yes No 897 .507 ± 24 .587 5.200 ± 1.625 0.180 0.221 ± 0.035 5.931 ± 0.069 1.603 ± 0.081 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso No Yes Yes 894 .902 ± 24 .116 4.200 ± 0.970 0.000 0.399 ± 0.156 5.911 ± 0.064 1.571 ± 0.084 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso Yes No No 892 .149 ± 24 .567 3.400 ± 1.288 0.000 0.340 ± 0.066 5.855 ± 0.071 1.386 ± 0.609 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso Yes No Yes 892 .757 ± 24 .417 6.000 ± 1.225 0.204 0.269 ± 0.068 5.895 ± 0.060 1.329 ± 0.590 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso Yes Yes No 895 .986 ± 31 .681 6.000 ± 1.291 0.019 0.217 ± 0.057 5.764 ± 0.086 1.277 ± 0.589 Qwen3 MoE Parabola Pso Yes Yes Yes 872 .936 ± 31 .964 3.600 ± 1.030 0.000 0.215 ± 0.055 5.895 ± 0.060 1.189 ± 0.594 

Table 8: Full results for Qwen3 MoE on straight-line, NACA airfoil, and parabola targets. Column definitions follow Table 5. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 34 Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Qwen LB Grid No No No 6.546 ± 0.299 13 .000 ± 1.517 24 .042 0.795 ± 0.031 7.020 ± 0.123 2.140 ± 0.130 Qwen LB Grid No No Yes 7.411 ± 0.541 10 .800 ± 1.530 10 .626 0.810 ± 0.099 6.632 ± 0.144 1.737 ± 0.136 Qwen LB Grid No Yes No 6.547 ± 0.593 7.800 ± 1.068 21 .267 1.145 ± 0.147 7.386 ± 0.145 2.571 ± 0.143 Qwen LB Grid No Yes Yes 6.475 ± 0.610 11 .600 ± 2.379 7.758 0.742 ± 0.122 7.484 ± 0.186 2.516 ± 0.183 Qwen LB Grid Yes No No 7.214 ± 0.656 9.200 ± 2.332 18 .821 0.670 ± 0.022 7.620 ± 0.225 2.480 ± 0.674 Qwen LB Grid Yes No Yes 7.676 ± 0.474 15 .000 ± 0.894 10 .150 0.885 ± 0.181 6.870 ± 0.152 2.250 ± 0.647 Qwen LB Grid Yes Yes No 7.436 ± 0.480 11 .200 ± 2.596 8.809 0.907 ± 0.127 7.300 ± 0.134 2.179 ± 0.639 Qwen LB Grid Yes Yes Yes 5.111 ± 0.808 14 .800 ± 2.059 39 .324 0.998 ± 0.128 7.700 ± 0.177 2.475 ± 0.650 Qwen LB Pso No No No 8.610 ± 0.601 11 .800 ± 4.116 8.467 1.131 ± 0.259 7.443 ± 0.196 2.113 ± 0.142 Qwen LB Pso No No Yes 8.340 ± 0.432 15 .600 ± 2.619 9.994 1.060 ± 0.135 7.170 ± 0.126 2.510 ± 0.135 Qwen LB Pso No Yes No 8.033 ± 0.610 15 .600 ± 2.542 14 .071 1.486 ± 0.264 6.867 ± 0.091 2.450 ± 0.097 Qwen LB Pso No Yes Yes 8.363 ± 0.578 16 .600 ± 2.676 13 .075 1.356 ± 0.273 7.283 ± 0.100 2.758 ± 0.113 Qwen LB Pso Yes No No 8.094 ± 0.330 18 .800 ± 0.583 12 .631 1.207 ± 0.150 6.840 ± 0.166 2.200 ± 0.659 Qwen LB Pso Yes No Yes 8.274 ± 0.612 16 .000 ± 3.017 12 .625 1.068 ± 0.160 6.880 ± 0.137 2.080 ± 0.621 Qwen LB Pso Yes Yes No 7.755 ± 0.674 15 .400 ± 2.502 16 .945 1.091 ± 0.120 6.671 ± 0.141 2.000 ± 0.630 Qwen LB Pso Yes Yes Yes 8.214 ± 0.595 15 .000 ± 2.470 9.898 1.408 ± 0.094 6.936 ± 0.136 1.921 ± 0.625 Qwen Circle Grid No No No 1.421 ± 0.446 16 .800 ± 1.772 66 .319 0.841 ± 0.039 6.960 ± 0.125 2.090 ± 0.111 Qwen Circle Grid No No Yes 2.165 ± 1.184 13 .000 ± 2.811 67 .059 0.570 ± 0.074 7.320 ± 0.151 2.330 ± 0.145 Qwen Circle Grid No Yes No 5.729 ± 3.229 11 .600 ± 2.482 49 .361 1.124 ± 0.314 6.993 ± 0.172 2.158 ± 0.142 Qwen Circle Grid No Yes Yes 2.801 ± 1.048 16 .800 ± 1.655 64 .558 1.140 ± 0.210 7.514 ± 0.143 2.507 ± 0.110 Qwen Circle Grid Yes No No 2.055 ± 0.540 16 .400 ± 1.965 71 .924 0.704 ± 0.060 6.520 ± 0.160 1.880 ± 0.622 Qwen Circle Grid Yes No Yes 3.016 ± 1.513 17 .000 ± 1.342 65 .665 0.683 ± 0.089 8.298 ± 0.224 2.846 ± 0.711 Qwen Circle Grid Yes Yes No 1.569 ± 0.545 15 .600 ± 1.939 80 .521 0.816 ± 0.115 6.957 ± 0.129 1.714 ± 0.607 Qwen Circle Grid Yes Yes Yes 1.426 ± 0.320 12 .000 ± 2.273 80 .916 0.803 ± 0.082 6.567 ± 0.148 1.825 ± 0.628 Qwen Circle Pso No No No 2.796 ± 1.260 9.200 ± 2.853 72 .914 1.072 ± 0.152 7.279 ± 0.119 2.558 ± 0.142 Qwen Circle Pso No No Yes 5.096 ± 2.619 11 .600 ± 2.064 54 .169 1.544 ± 0.345 7.553 ± 0.102 2.965 ± 0.115 Qwen Circle Pso No Yes No 3.511 ± 1.910 16 .800 ± 0.970 72 .015 1.117 ± 0.158 6.886 ± 0.129 2.521 ± 0.103 Qwen Circle Pso No Yes Yes 8.548 ± 3.112 13 .600 ± 2.839 19 .337 1.288 ± 0.152 7.267 ± 0.091 2.475 ± 0.124 Qwen Circle Pso Yes No No 4.499 ± 2.935 15 .400 ± 2.015 71 .976 0.658 ± 0.087 6.380 ± 0.120 1.800 ± 0.606 Qwen Circle Pso Yes No Yes 4.987 ± 2.249 17 .200 ± 1.497 63 .842 0.932 ± 0.164 6.340 ± 0.142 1.770 ± 0.636 Qwen Circle Pso Yes Yes No 5.251 ± 2.491 13 .000 ± 2.720 63 .196 1.098 ± 0.183 6.443 ± 0.120 1.679 ± 0.607 Qwen Circle Pso Yes Yes Yes 4.308 ± 1.784 14 .400 ± 2.400 62 .833 1.337 ± 0.164 6.414 ± 0.140 1.771 ± 0.647 Qwen Ellipse Grid No No No 2.912 ± 0.692 8.400 ± 2.522 40 .954 0.706 ± 0.096 6.620 ± 0.113 1.480 ± 0.107 Qwen Ellipse Grid No No Yes 2.470 ± 0.285 7.200 ± 1.241 36 .856 0.724 ± 0.040 7.280 ± 0.144 2.000 ± 0.129 Qwen Ellipse Grid No Yes No 2.504 ± 0.402 9.600 ± 2.694 41 .216 0.906 ± 0.041 5.950 ± 0.156 1.575 ± 0.110 Qwen Ellipse Grid No Yes Yes 2.434 ± 0.327 12 .800 ± 2.498 36 .607 0.710 ± 0.099 7.206 ± 0.129 2.221 ± 0.120 Qwen Ellipse Grid Yes No No 2.861 ± 0.573 6.000 ± 0.894 25 .059 0.719 ± 0.151 7.221 ± 0.144 1.992 ± 0.634 Qwen Ellipse Grid Yes No Yes 2.824 ± 0.531 12 .400 ± 3.187 42 .206 0.630 ± 0.087 7.200 ± 0.178 1.690 ± 0.630 Qwen Ellipse Grid Yes Yes No 2.518 ± 0.384 8.600 ± 2.462 36 .174 0.989 ± 0.161 7.214 ± 0.128 1.829 ± 0.617 Qwen Ellipse Grid Yes Yes Yes 2.512 ± 0.418 12 .600 ± 2.272 31 .074 1.010 ± 0.223 7.744 ± 0.169 2.389 ± 0.652 Qwen Ellipse Pso No No No 4.383 ± 0.769 12 .400 ± 3.311 35 .405 1.070 ± 0.128 6.820 ± 0.140 2.090 ± 0.117 Qwen Ellipse Pso No No Yes 4.664 ± 0.770 10 .000 ± 2.828 23 .732 0.941 ± 0.068 6.100 ± 0.077 1.560 ± 0.095 Qwen Ellipse Pso No Yes No 4.338 ± 0.858 14 .000 ± 1.975 31 .468 1.252 ± 0.167 6.700 ± 0.099 1.900 ± 0.113 Qwen Ellipse Pso No Yes Yes 4.476 ± 0.851 14 .400 ± 3.265 27 .073 1.348 ± 0.172 6.683 ± 0.115 2.183 ± 0.115 Qwen Ellipse Pso Yes No No 4.560 ± 0.605 14 .600 ± 2.768 23 .837 0.808 ± 0.123 6.880 ± 0.189 2.100 ± 0.647 Qwen Ellipse Pso Yes No Yes 5.038 ± 0.948 17 .400 ± 0.872 21 .189 1.178 ± 0.158 6.280 ± 0.114 1.440 ± 0.619 Qwen Ellipse Pso Yes Yes No 4.032 ± 0.575 14 .600 ± 2.040 37 .859 1.185 ± 0.210 6.233 ± 0.159 1.758 ± 0.619 Qwen Ellipse Pso Yes Yes Yes 4.787 ± 0.687 11 .400 ± 3.156 23 .065 1.090 ± 0.116 7.036 ± 0.114 2.079 ± 0.624 

Table 9: Full results for Qwen on Lemniscates of Bernoulli ( ∞), circle, and ellipse targets. Column definitions follow Table 5. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 35 Model Shape Opt Planner DR QG Best chamf. Steps % Imp. % Semantic Links Goal links Qwen Line Grid No No No 0.839 ± 0.439 13 .000 ± 2.665 78 .334 0.688 ± 0.065 6.580 ± 0.162 1.640 ± 0.117 Qwen Line Grid No No Yes 1.487 ± 1.214 14 .200 ± 2.596 80 .754 0.713 ± 0.082 7.010 ± 0.139 2.283 ± 0.128 Qwen Line Grid No Yes No 0.678 ± 0.311 15 .200 ± 1.934 89 .407 0.975 ± 0.124 6.702 ± 0.179 2.092 ± 0.132 Qwen Line Grid No Yes Yes 0.675 ± 0.393 11 .000 ± 2.214 89 .604 0.838 ± 0.093 6.475 ± 0.138 1.795 ± 0.116 Qwen Line Grid Yes No No 0.697 ± 0.280 15 .200 ± 2.922 83 .392 0.719 ± 0.022 7.200 ± 0.216 2.040 ± 0.691 Qwen Line Grid Yes No Yes 1.821 ± 1.136 12 .600 ± 1.860 74 .093 0.655 ± 0.057 7.220 ± 0.188 1.960 ± 0.637 Qwen Line Grid Yes Yes No 0.934 ± 0.395 11 .800 ± 2.177 79 .404 0.860 ± 0.105 6.924 ± 0.366 2.348 ± 0.828 Qwen Line Grid Yes Yes Yes 1.761 ± 0.816 13 .000 ± 2.569 69 .311 0.790 ± 0.286 6.818 ± 0.179 1.802 ± 0.640 Qwen Line Pso No No No 3.026 ± 1.214 8.600 ± 2.159 72 .877 0.631 ± 0.088 5.760 ± 0.111 1.440 ± 0.110 Qwen Line Pso No No Yes 2.921 ± 1.958 16 .400 ± 2.462 76 .318 0.870 ± 0.032 6.140 ± 0.111 1.730 ± 0.100 Qwen Line Pso No Yes No 1.184 ± 0.642 16 .000 ± 2.915 87 .660 1.288 ± 0.225 6.057 ± 0.127 1.688 ± 0.113 Qwen Line Pso No Yes Yes 4.083 ± 1.935 13 .600 ± 1.913 62 .652 0.872 ± 0.149 5.513 ± 0.137 1.675 ± 0.111 Qwen Line Pso Yes No No 3.076 ± 1.724 17 .600 ± 1.166 70 .736 0.806 ± 0.020 6.770 ± 0.148 2.340 ± 0.627 Qwen Line Pso Yes No Yes 2.091 ± 1.315 13 .400 ± 1.288 75 .320 0.899 ± 0.077 6.915 ± 0.168 1.899 ± 0.652 Qwen Line Pso Yes Yes No 1.447 ± 0.732 10 .800 ± 2.990 86 .191 0.820 ± 0.225 6.599 ± 0.143 1.833 ± 0.617 Qwen Line Pso Yes Yes Yes 2.072 ± 1.187 17 .800 ± 1.020 78 .845 1.194 ± 0.449 5.935 ± 0.138 1.367 ± 0.607 Qwen Naca Grid No No No 0.366 ± 0.099 15 .000 ± 1.871 49 .809 0.892 ± 0.075 6.920 ± 0.162 2.310 ± 0.130 Qwen Naca Grid No No Yes 0.566 ± 0.144 11 .000 ± 2.881 21 .614 0.710 ± 0.113 8.182 ± 0.235 2.852 ± 0.217 Qwen Naca Grid No Yes No 0.484 ± 0.115 8.600 ± 2.839 32 .050 1.058 ± 0.103 6.357 ± 0.110 1.693 ± 0.109 Qwen Naca Grid No Yes Yes 0.487 ± 0.132 12 .800 ± 3.839 49 .797 0.813 ± 0.161 7.737 ± 0.158 2.489 ± 0.156 Qwen Naca Grid Yes No No 0.400 ± 0.124 12 .000 ± 3.507 52 .115 1.003 ± 0.172 7.480 ± 0.210 2.300 ± 0.687 Qwen Naca Grid Yes No Yes 0.404 ± 0.121 9.800 ± 2.223 48 .271 0.673 ± 0.052 7.360 ± 0.199 2.580 ± 0.663 Qwen Naca Grid Yes Yes No 0.432 ± 0.129 8.400 ± 2.676 49 .648 0.772 ± 0.094 7.417 ± 0.196 1.875 ± 0.624 Qwen Naca Grid Yes Yes Yes 0.473 ± 0.181 16 .200 ± 1.114 47 .869 0.985 ± 0.143 7.013 ± 0.143 2.081 ± 0.615 Qwen Naca Pso No No No 0.664 ± 0.279 16 .200 ± 1.158 32 .861 1.030 ± 0.069 6.940 ± 0.196 2.050 ± 0.158 Qwen Naca Pso No No Yes 0.563 ± 0.202 11 .000 ± 2.280 37 .899 1.042 ± 0.133 6.820 ± 0.145 2.280 ± 0.150 Qwen Naca Pso No Yes No 0.556 ± 0.214 8.600 ± 2.804 34 .942 1.274 ± 0.299 6.217 ± 0.100 1.833 ± 0.107 Qwen Naca Pso No Yes Yes 0.722 ± 0.342 12 .000 ± 2.324 32 .324 1.227 ± 0.185 5.900 ± 0.140 1.450 ± 0.127 Qwen Naca Pso Yes No No 0.417 ± 0.173 16 .400 ± 2.227 49 .975 1.175 ± 0.099 6.800 ± 0.142 2.250 ± 0.640 Qwen Naca Pso Yes No Yes 0.571 ± 0.224 16 .600 ± 1.631 52 .741 1.285 ± 0.210 6.960 ± 0.174 2.250 ± 0.658 Qwen Naca Pso Yes Yes No 0.729 ± 0.332 12 .800 ± 2.888 47 .248 1.308 ± 0.298 6.380 ± 0.175 1.810 ± 0.626 Qwen Naca Pso Yes Yes Yes 0.394 ± 0.123 12 .200 ± 3.121 44 .510 1.221 ± 0.177 6.333 ± 0.171 1.817 ± 0.636 Qwen Parabola Grid No No No 493 .251 ± 99 .687 14 .200 ± 2.245 44 .790 0.941 ± 0.146 7.140 ± 0.176 2.420 ± 0.145 Qwen Parabola Grid No No Yes 735 .749 ± 43 .624 16 .200 ± 1.530 17 .438 0.760 ± 0.117 7.680 ± 0.147 2.970 ± 0.152 Qwen Parabola Grid No Yes No 623 .226 ± 107 .714 17 .800 ± 1.715 30 .770 0.893 ± 0.125 6.850 ± 0.096 2.475 ± 0.092 Qwen Parabola Grid No Yes Yes 545 .550 ± 159 .913 14 .600 ± 1.470 38 .662 0.890 ± 0.082 6.556 ± 0.101 1.894 ± 0.091 Qwen Parabola Grid Yes No No 534 .193 ± 108 .984 16 .600 ± 1.887 40 .330 0.745 ± 0.063 6.520 ± 0.174 2.250 ± 0.657 Qwen Parabola Grid Yes No Yes 692 .076 ± 53 .259 15 .000 ± 1.483 22 .021 0.609 ± 0.098 6.900 ± 0.210 2.270 ± 0.658 Qwen Parabola Grid Yes Yes No 621 .629 ± 81 .346 17 .400 ± 0.927 30 .160 0.851 ± 0.137 6.744 ± 0.130 1.794 ± 0.600 Qwen Parabola Grid Yes Yes Yes 814 .554 ± 50 .081 14 .800 ± 1.562 8.473 0.700 ± 0.144 6.767 ± 0.109 1.856 ± 0.605 Qwen Parabola Pso No No No 846 .103 ± 49 .383 15 .800 ± 2.596 5.560 0.918 ± 0.100 6.380 ± 0.132 1.890 ± 0.113 Qwen Parabola Pso No No Yes 831 .704 ± 49 .272 12 .800 ± 2.746 7.266 1.060 ± 0.168 6.740 ± 0.109 2.200 ± 0.126 Qwen Parabola Pso No Yes No 842 .036 ± 47 .694 15 .400 ± 1.631 6.046 0.888 ± 0.227 6.271 ± 0.111 1.393 ± 0.079 Qwen Parabola Pso No Yes Yes 893 .487 ± 24 .173 15 .400 ± 1.965 0.283 1.146 ± 0.119 7.250 ± 0.146 2.288 ± 0.112 Qwen Parabola Pso Yes No No 861 .781 ± 41 .365 11 .000 ± 3.592 3.822 0.892 ± 0.144 6.530 ± 0.219 1.860 ± 0.665 Qwen Parabola Pso Yes No Yes 858 .141 ± 38 .651 14 .000 ± 3.464 4.037 0.864 ± 0.283 7.300 ± 0.185 2.190 ± 0.674 Qwen Parabola Pso Yes Yes No 884 .992 ± 23 .229 16 .600 ± 2.227 1.152 1.019 ± 0.120 5.929 ± 0.126 1.514 ± 0.606 Qwen Parabola Pso Yes Yes Yes 887 .336 ± 21 .585 12 .600 ± 2.943 0.954 0.938 ± 0.137 6.317 ± 0.105 1.425 ± 0.601 

Table 10: Full results for Qwen on straight-line, NACA airfoil, and parabola targets. Column defini-tions follow Table 5. Each row aggregates 5 independent runs. 36 Enum+GA vs. Symbolic at High Budget (60 ×300) 

Pop. × Gen. Bars Model x/Base ∆ (x −Base) Imp.% 

60 ×300 4 Llama 1.130 ± 0.086 ↑0.130 ↓13 .0% 60 ×300 4 Qwen 1.189 ± 0.092 ↑0.189 ↓18 .9% 60 ×300 4 Qwen3 MoE 1.522 ± 0.184 ↑0.522 ↓52 .2% 60 ×300 6 Llama 1.175 ± 0.153 ↑0.175 ↓17 .5% 60 ×300 6 Qwen 1.219 ± 0.140 ↑0.219 ↓21 .9% 60 ×300 6 Qwen3 MoE 1.519 ± 0.157 ↑0.519 ↓51 .9% Table 11: High-budget subset (60 ×300). Values are normalized index (x/Base), with mean ± standard error aggregated across shared target shapes. 37