Title: Mimosa Framework: Toward Evolving Multi-Agent Systems for Scientific Research

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28986v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:11:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
# Mimosa Framework: Toward Evolving Multi-Agent Systems for Scientific Research 

Martin Legrand *1,2 , Tao Jiang *1,2 , Matthieu Feraud 1,2 , Benjamin Navet 1, 2, 3 , Yousouf Taghzouti 1, 2, 3 , Fabien Gandon 2, 3 , Elise Dumont 1, and Louis-Félix Nothias *1,2 1Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, ICN, Nice, France 

> 2

Interdisciplinary Institute for Artificial Intelligence (3iA) Côte d’Azur, Sophia-Antipolis, France 

> 3

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, France 

## 30th March 2026 

Abstract 

Current Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR) systems, despite lever-aging large language models (LLMs) and agentic architectures, remain constrained by fixed workflows and toolsets that prevent adaptation to evolving tasks and environments. We introduce Mimosa , an evolving multi-agent framework that automatically synthesizes task-specific multi-agent workflows and iteratively refines them through experimental feedback. 

Mimosa leverages the Model Context Protocol (MCP) for dynamic tool discovery, generates workflow topologies via a meta-orchestrator , executes subtasks through code-generating agents that invoke available tools and scientific software libraries, and scores executions with an LLM-based judge 

whose feedback drives workflow refinement. On ScienceAgentBench , Mimosa achieves a success rate of 43.1% with DeepSeek-V3.2, surpassing both single-agent baselines and static multi-agent configurations. Our results further reveal that models respond heterogeneously to multi-agent decomposition and iterative learning, indi-cating that the benefits of workflow evolution depend on the capabilities of the underlying execution model. Beyond these benchmarks, Mimosa ’s modular architecture and tool-agnostic design make it readily extensible, and its fully logged execution traces and archived workflows support auditability by preserving every analytical step for inspection and potential replication. Combined with domain-expert guidance, the framework has the potential to automate a broad range of computationally accessible scientific tasks across disciplines. Released as a fully open-source platform, Mimosa aims to provide an open foundation for community-driven ASR. 

*Co-corresponding authors: martin.legrand@univ-cotedazur.fr, tao.jiang@univ-cotedazur.fr, louis-felix.nothias@univ-cotedazur.fr 

1

> arXiv:2603.28986v1 [cs.AI] 30 Mar 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Context and Problem. Advances in automation, high-throughput experi-mentation, and computation have greatly expanded the scientific community’s capacity to generate data—in fields such as biology, drug discovery, materials science, and climate modeling—but the ability to transform these data into actionable knowledge has not kept pace [ 1 , 2]. Researchers must continually arbitrate between breadth and depth of analysis under the practical constraints of time, expertise, and computational resources [ 3 ], even as pressing societal challenges underscore the need for methods that accelerate knowledge generation beyond current limits [4]. Compounding this bottleneck, the fragmentation of methods, tools, and reporting standards across laboratories has produced a reproducibility crisis in which critical findings become difficult or impossible to verify [ 5]. Reliable and unreliable results intermingle within the scientific record, growing increasingly indistinguishable [ 6 ]. When subsequent research builds on this uncertain founda-tion without efficient means to audit prior claims, the risk of misdirecting future work escalates [7]. Addressing these interconnected challenges requires systems that not only automate scientific tasks at scale—whether purely computational or involving laboratory instruments through digital interfaces—but do so through transparent, adaptable workflows whose every analytical step is recorded and auditable, both during the production cycle and when results are communicated [7]. 

State of the Art and Gap. Emerging paradigms such as Autonomous Sci-entific Research (ASR) and Self-Driving Labs (SDLs) [ 8, 9] offer a promising path forward by automating core scientific tasks and experimentation. Recent systems leverage large language models (LLMs) with expanded context windows, domain-specialized agentic architectures, and reasoning frameworks such as tree-of-thought and tool-augmented agents that execute multi-step experimental protocols with increasing sophistication [ 10 , 11 ]. State-of-the-art platforms pro-pose to integrate instrument control, literature retrieval, and iterative hypothesis refinement within unified pipelines [12]. However, current AI-agent systems exhibit two interconnected limitations when deployed in complex, real-world scientific settings: (1) limitations in long-horizon LLM-based execution, including context window constraints and degraded use of relevant information across extended trajectories, which are associated with failure modes such as information loss, hallucinations, attention dilution, and semantic drift [ 13 , 14 ]; and (2) architectural rigidity, namely a limited ability to reorganize agent coordination, communication structure, and tool use in response to evolving experimental demands, unexpected tool failures, or non-linear discovery trajectories [12]. In practice, these systems typically rely on fixed toolsets, computational libraries, and predefined coordination protocols, which prevent them from recon-figuring when new instruments or software resources are introduced, objectives are revised, or intermediate results call for alternative analytical paths. Conse-2quently, even sophisticated systems remain bounded by their initial configuration and function as powerful but brittle automation tools rather than genuinely adaptive scientific systems. 

Research Questions and Contributions. Our central research question is: How can multi-agent systems adjust their coordination and tool use as scientific tasks change, without losing important context or becoming too rigid to adapt? A complementary question asks how such a system can remain capable across the full breadth of tasks that scientific research demands—from data acquisition and computational analysis to control of experimental apparatus through programmatic interfaces, result interpretation, and knowledge synthesis— rather than excelling only in narrow, predefined operations. A third, longer-term motivation concerns the computational reproducibility of published scientific results. To make this concrete, consider computational drug design. A typical study runs through several connected stages: virtual screening, molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulations [ 15 ]. Each stage requires different expertise and different decisions, often under competing scientific and computational constraints. Results from later stages frequently challenge earlier assumptions, requiring iterative revision of parameters, hypotheses, or analytical paths [ 16 ]. Such recursive adjustment is constitutive of complex scientific inquiry, particularly in interdisciplinary and computationally intensive settings. Current AI systems, however, lack robust mechanisms to maintain specialized roles across stages, critically reassess earlier decisions, or adapt focus as new findings emerge. Single-agent systems and fixed pipelines offer no reliable means of doing so, and the same rigidity limits the potential for revisiting prior computational analyses in a systematic way. We address these challenges through Mimosa , an open-source framework for automated computational scientific tasks. Its modular architecture leverages the Model Context Protocol (MCP) [ 17 ] for dynamic integration of diverse computational tools and laboratory instruments. Rather than relying on static pipelines, Mimosa dynamically composes task-specific workflows and refines them in response to execution feedback. This adaptability is sustained by a meta-learning layer that continuously refines how agentic workflows are designed and coordinated based on prior performance. 

Mimosa offers an open alternative to closed, rigid systems for automating time-consuming scientific tasks from minimal task instructions. More broadly, it is designed to help researchers scale analytical work more effectively and to support efforts toward more reliable and auditable scientific discovery. 

Code availability. Both Mimosa and Toolomics , our companion platform for MCP server management, are released as open-source software under the Apache License 2.0, a permissive open-source license enabling broad reuse, modification, and integration across research and industrial environments: 3https://github.com/HolobiomicsLab/Mimosa-AI https://github.com/HolobiomicsLab/Toolomics 

# 2 Related work 

## 2.1 Autonomous Scientific Research (ASR) 

The emergence of LLMs has catalyzed a paradigm shift from “AI for Science”, where models act as static predictors, to “agentic science”, characterized by autonomous decision-making and iterative reasoning [ 18 ]. Unlike traditional automation restricted to predefined tasks, ASR leverages the reasoning and planning capabilities of agentic systems to operate across multiple stages of the research lifecycle [ 12 ], with recent surveys noting a move beyond literature synthesis toward more active roles in hypothesis generation and experimental design [ 19 ]. A critical frontier now shifts attention from model capacity alone to the scalability of agentic systems: their ability to manage complex tasks, large scientific datasets, and multiple concurrent workflows with reasonable computational and economic efficiency [ 11 ]. In this regime, bottlenecks arise from the rigidity of agent coordination [ 20 ], saturation of context windows with data returned by scientific tools [ 21 ], and brittle decision-making over extended discovery trajectories [22]. In domains such as molecular docking and materials discovery, ASR systems provide a dual benefit: they leverage domain-specific expertise and state-of-the-art cheminformatics tools to explore chemical spaces far beyond human capacity, while making the scientific process inherently reproducible and auditable by design [ 11 , 18 ]. Closed-loop experimentation is particularly transformative in materials science and catalysis, where experimental landscapes are often non-linear and highly complex [ 8]. By offloading execution and optimization to autonomous platforms, researchers can prioritize high-level analysis, experimental strategy, theory development and interpretation. While ASR focuses on the cognitive and computational aspects of discovery, Self-Driving Labs (SDLs) represent the physical realization of these principles through the integration of AI-driven decision-making with programmatically accessible laboratory instruments [ 8]. SDLs close the experimental loop by enabling AI systems to analyze outputs, select informative next experiments, and iteratively adapt experimental design [ 23 ]. As these systems increasingly close the loop, the primary limitation shifts from task-specific automation to the design of adaptive agentic architectures capable of sustaining long-horizon reasoning, coordination, and methodological self-revision under sparse and delayed scientific feedback [ 12 ]. These challenges motivate a closer examination of the agentic architectures that underpin such systems. 42.2 Agentic Architectures 

The transition from static LLMs to agentic systems is defined by the integration of reasoning, tool-use, agent-to-agent collaboration and iterative planning [ 10 ]. While much of this work targets coding, mathematics, and general reasoning benchmarks, the architectural patterns it introduces—task decomposition, role specialization, and automated agent design—are directly relevant to scientific computing and discovery. Agents have demonstrated initial success in scientific domains such as chemical synthesis planning [ 24 ] and mechanistic enzyme design [ 25 ], reflecting increasingly active engagement with AI-driven scientific design in these areas. Long-horizon adaptability further requires mechanisms for strategy revision, self-reflection, and coordination updates in response to empirical feedback [ 12 ]. Multiple paradigms in architecture have emerged to address these issues. 

2.2.1 Single-Agent Systems 

Early frameworks rely on a single tool-augmented agent to handle multiple stages of a given research task. While capable of accelerating hypothesis generation in specialized fields like protein design [ 25 ], single-agent systems are prone to performance collapse when faced with unfamiliar tasks such as newest Kaggle challenges [26] or novel research challenges [27]. A critical failure mode is the inability to recover from early erroneous hypothe-ses, as a single reasoning trajectory offers no mechanism to escape a flawed line of inquiry once committed, leading to terminal reasoning loops. Without external critique or adaptive strategy revision, early sampling errors can irreversibly corrupt the entire discovery trajectory [12]. 

2.2.2 Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) 

To address the limitations of single-agent systems, MAS frameworks distribute cognitive load across specialized roles—experimenters, analysts, reviewers— sometimes equipped with dedicated tools, collaborating to verify results [28]. While multi-agent coordination has been shown to degrade performance on sequential reasoning tasks [ 20 ], other work establishes that under specific prompting conditions, MAS can develop measurable emergent coordination that improves task performance through complementary role specialization [29]. Furthermore, recent studies suggest mainstream MAS operate as constrained finite-state machines with predefined transition protocols [ 30 ], where fixed coordi-nation protocols conflict with the open-ended and non-linear nature of real-world scientific inquiry [31]. Scientific discovery requires agents to dynamically reconfigure their inter-action topology in response to task complexity, uncertainty, and unexpected experimental outcomes, capabilities largely absent from static MAS designs [ 18 ]. 52.2.3 Automated Agent Design and Self-Evolving Systems 

A prominent line of work treats the design of agentic systems itself as a search problem. ADAS [ 32 ] introduces a meta-agent that iteratively programs new agents in an unconstrained code space, maintaining an archive of discovered designs. AgentSquare [ 33 ] proposes a modular design space decomposing agents into four functional modules (planning, reasoning, tool use, memory) and searches over module combinations via evolution and recombination. GPTSwarm [ 34 ]models multi-agent systems as computational graphs and optimizes edge weights and node operations. EvoAgent [ 35 ] uses evolutionary algorithms to automati-cally extend single-agent systems into multi-agent populations. At the prompt level, Promptbreeder [ 36 ] and EvoPrompt [ 37 ] demonstrate that prompts can be evolved through iterative mutation and selection. Many of these systems were introduced and evaluated on coding, mathematics, and general reasoning tasks, though some have also been tested in broader tool-use settings. At the frontier of this design-as-search paradigm, self-evolving systems exhibit meta-learning — the ability to autonomously modify their own code, tools, and architectures [ 32 , 38 ]. For scientific agents, optimization and evolution are not merely about refining parameters, but about improving how agents navigate the scientific landscape — from leveraging prior knowledge and reasoning strategies to mastering specialized tools and structuring memory [ 12 ]. Systems such as the Darwin Gödel Machine [ 39 ] and MAS-Zero [ 40 ] explore open-ended self-modification, while CASCADE [ 41 ] extends cumulative executable skill acquisition to scientific domains. However, although much of this literature was initially validated on coding and reasoning benchmarks, recent work has begun extending self-improving agent design to scientific computing tasks. These tasks place greater emphasis on domain-specific tools, heterogeneous data formats, and experimentally or domain-grounded outputs than the benchmark settings that motivated much of the early literature. The remaining gap reflects both the relatively recent emergence of suitable scientific benchmarks and a difference in search space: many of these systems evolve unconstrained agent code, agent-level strategies, or coordination patterns, whereas scientific workflows require explicit organization around hetero-geneous tools, structured task decomposition, and domain-grounded validation. Direct comparison on a shared benchmark remains an open challenge. Recent automated multi-agent architecture search methods broaden this design space in complementary directions. MaAS [ 40 ] replaces the search for a single static architecture with an agentic supernet from which query-dependent workflows are sampled at inference time. AutoMaAS [ 30 ] extends this line with neural architecture search-inspired operator generation, fusion, and elimination under joint performance–cost objectives. MetaAgent [ 30 ] casts system con-struction as finite-state-machine synthesis with explicit state transitions, while MAS-Zero [ 40 ] performs inference-time design–critique–refine without a held-out validation set. Recent ASR systems illustrate how workflow-design choices translate into end-to-end scientific capability. The AI Scientist-v2 advances end-to-end scien-6tific paper production through agentic tree search [ 42 ], while CASCADE [ 41 ]introduces both a cumulative skill-acquisition framework and its companion SciSkillBench benchmark for chemistry and materials tasks. On the evaluation side, BixBench [ 43 ] provides a dedicated benchmark for LLM-based agents in computational biology, and ScienceAgentBench [ 44 ] offers 102 data-driven dis-covery tasks spanning four scientific disciplines. Together these developments underscore rapid progress in ASR while leaving open the question of how to achieve auditable, adaptive workflow evolution across heterogeneous scientific tasks. 

## 2.3 Summary of open challenges 

Across these paradigms, four interconnected limitations persist. First, single-agent frameworks suffer from semantic drift, reasoning collapse, and progressive loss of epistemic memory as context accumulates [ 14 , 45 , 46 ], leading to terminal reasoning loops and repetitive errors [27, 47]. Second, multi-agent systems mitigate drift through specialization but remain bound by static coordination protocols that cannot adapt when experiments behave unexpectedly, new tools are introduced, or existing tool documentation is updated [18]. Third, self-evolving architectures have demonstrated meta-learning on coding and reasoning benchmarks [ 32 , 39 ], and recent work has begun extending cumu-lative skill acquisition to scientific domains, notably chemistry and materials science [ 41 ]. In parallel, a growing number of systems target heterogeneous scientific tool ecosystems in biomedicine and bioinformatics, with dedicated benchmarks also emerging [ 43 ]. However, these capabilities are still rarely demonstrated together: cumulative skill growth, broad scientific domain cover-age, and architecture-level self-modification typically remain distributed across separate lines of work and validation settings. Fourth, existing ASR systems still seldom treat the execution environment as a first-class design concern. In many systems, tool invocations remain effectively stateless, environment configurations are implicit, and execution traces are not captured in a form structured for downstream verification [ 7]. Dependence on proprietary, closed-weight models or opaque agentic systems further compounds this problem, creating barriers to reproducibility, auditing, and community adoption [5]. These gaps motivate an architecture that treats the system’s own coordination and exploration logic as a mutable, learnable component, while embedding the reproducibility and traceability principles established by scientific workflow managers into AI-driven research automation. 

## 2.4 Positioning of Mimosa 

Relative to the paradigms surveyed above, Mimosa addresses these limitations through a combination of design choices that span workflow evolution, tool integration, and execution infrastructure. Unlike prompt-level methods such as 7Promptbreeder [ 36 ] and EvoPrompt [ 37 ], and unlike architecture search systems such as MaAS, AutoMaAS, MetaAgent, and MAS-Zero that were primarily introduced on general reasoning workloads, Mimosa targets scientific computing and combines four design choices that are central to its evolutionary design and still uncommon in combination: (1) it operates over DAG-structured workflows with explicit agent roles, communication edges, and tool allocations rather than unconstrained code or fixed module slots; (2) it integrates dynamic tool discov-ery via MCP, enabling evolved workflows to adapt to changing computational environments; (3) it is developed for scientific research tasks and evaluated on 

ScienceAgentBench [44 ], where ground-truth assessment is available, providing both a fitness signal for workflow evolution and an empirical testbed that remains comparatively uncommon in prior automated design work; and (4) it deploys tools as containerised MCP servers within isolated execution environments, producing structured execution traces that are reproducible and auditable—properties that, combined with its open-source design, make discovered workflows verifiable and portable across computational contexts. While Mimosa is inspired by evolution-ary design principles developed for open-ended objectives, in this work we focus on iterative refinement of task-specific workflows. 

# 3 Methods 

## 3.1 Motivation for evolving workflow topology 

3.1.1 From Single-Agent Limits to Workflow Topology 

Large language models generate outputs by sampling from a policy πθ (· | p, o )

conditioned on a prompt p and tool set o ⊆ O , where θ are frozen weights. When equipped with execution capabilities, an agent follows an iterative trajectory: 

τ =  s(0) , a (0) , r (0) , s (1) , a (1) , r (1) , . . . , s (n)

where s(k) ∼ πθ (· | p, τ <k ) is the model output at step k, a(k) = parse (s(k)) is the extracted action or code, and r(k) = exec (a(k)) is the result of its execution. The agent terminates when a(n) invokes a terminal action, yielding final output 

s∗.

Semantic drift. Context accumulates linearly across steps: 

ck = [ p, s (0) , a (0) , r (0) , . . . , s (k)]

As |ck| grows, attention dilutes over earlier tokens and the effective opti-mization target shifts from task completion toward self-consistency with prior outputs [ 48 ]. This is consistent with evidence that information placed in the middle of a long context is used less reliably than information near the bound-aries [ 14 ], and recent work shows that long-horizon agents can progressively deviate from their initial objective, a failure mode termed goal drift [45 ]. Herein, we refer to this progressive divergence as semantic drift .83.1.2 Workflow Topology as a Structural Mitigation 

Multi-agent workflows address semantic drift through task decomposition. Rather than accumulating context over a long trajectory, the problem is decomposed into subtasks, each handled by an agent with bounded context. 

Definition. A workflow W is a directed acyclic graph: 

W = ( A, E )

where A = {a1, . . . , a k} is a set of agents (vertices) and E ⊆ A × A defines information flow (edges). Each agent ai = ( pi, o i, θ i) is assigned a subtask ti, a prompt pi, and a tool subset oi, and operates with fixed model parameters θi.Execution proceeds by topological order: each agent receives a bounded context 

[pi, s ∗

> i−1

]1 consisting of its prompt and the predecessor’s output, capping context at O(Lsubtask ) rather than O(k · Lsubtask ) for a single agent. 

Sensitivity to Prompt Specification Workflow performance is sensitive to how the global task tG is specified. An ambiguous or misaligned prompt propagates errors across the agent graph, and no per-agent optimization recovers a workflow that is structurally misaligned with the true objective. This motivates treating the workflow itself as a discovery problem, iteratively reshaping topology, prompts, and tool allocations in response to execution feedback. 

Workflow Execution Trace Executing workflow W yields an ordered tuple of final agent outputs: 

s∗ 

> W

=



s∗

> 1

, s ∗

> 2

, . . . , s ∗|A|



where s∗ 

> i

is the terminal output of agent ai ∈ A, ordered by the topological sort of W .

Workflow Discovery Problem We formulate workflow discovery as local search over the discrete space of workflow topologies W. The objective is to find: 

W ∗ = arg max   

> W∈W

J(s∗ 

> W

) (1) where J(s∗ 

> W

) is the expected performance of the workflow on global task tG,evaluated by an LLM-as-a-judge [49] over four evaluation criteria: 

J(s∗ 

> W

) = 14

 g(s∗ 

> W

) + c(s∗ 

> W

) + q(s∗ 

> W

) + a(s∗ 

> W

) (2) where g, c, q, a denote goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality, and answer plausibility respectively, each scored over the execution trajectory τ .This judge provides approximate rather than exact quality signal; its directional 

> 1This notation is a simplification for clarity. In Mimosa’s implementation, agents receive a sliding window of recent outputs from a shared cumulative state, permitting access beyond the immediate predecessor.

9accuracy is sufficient to drive convergence, and its correlation with benchmark ground-truth metrics is left to future work. Workflow mutations are single structural edits drawn from three operations: 

prompt refinement (rewriting pi for one agent), agent addition or removal 

(inserting or deleting a node from A with reconnected edges), and edge rewiring 

(modifying E to redirect information flow). Each mutation is proposed by an LLM given the current workflow definition and its evaluation feedback. 

Initialization For a new task tnew , we query the workflow archive A for prior candidates with similar task specifications: 

C = {W ∈ A | sim (tW , t new ) > ϵ } (3) where sim is the embedding cosine similarity function, ϵ = 0 .7 is the similarity threshold and tW is the task prompt associated with workflow W . If C̸ = ∅, we select the highest-scoring candidate W0 = arg max W ∈C score (W ) where score (W )

is the archived performance of the workflow on tW and apply a single mutation to adapt it to tnew . If C = ∅, W0 is synthesized de novo via one-shot LLM generation from tnew alone. (In practice, this de novo path was taken for all evaluated tasks; see Section 7.) 

Iterative Refinement Starting from W0, the meta-orchestrator performs single-incumbent local search. At each iteration n:1. Let Wn be the best-performing workflow observed so far. 2. Generate a neighbor W ′ ← Mutate (Wn) via a single structural or prompt-level edit proposed by the LLM. 3. Execute W ′, collect the final output of all the agents s∗ 

> W′

, and compute 

J(s∗ 

> W′

).4. Accept: Wn+1 ← W ′ if J(s∗ 

> W′

) > J (s∗ 

> Wn

), else Wn+1 ← Wn.Search terminates after a predefined number of iterations or when J(τ ) >

0.9. Unlike population-based evolutionary methods, only the single incumbent generates offspring; exploration is strictly local. Through successive refinement, the meta-orchestrator relocates, merges, or subdivides agent responsibilities, progressively aligning the workflow topology with the underlying structure of the task’s solution space. 

## 3.2 Architecture 

The Mimosa framework is implemented as an evolving MAS, decomposed into five distinct layers: (0) an optional planning layer that decomposes high-level scientific goals into individual tasks; (1) a tool discovery layer that dynamically enumerates available computational resources via MCP; (2) a meta-orchestration 

layer that synthesises and iteratively refines task-specific multi-agent workflows; 10 (3) an agent execution layer in which code-generating agents carry out subtasks using discovered tools; and (4) a judge layer that evaluates workflow executions and provides structured feedback to guide iterative refinement. This structure enables the transition from static pipelines to dynamic, empirically-optimized workflows. Each layer is described in turn below. 

3.2.1 Layer 0 (Optional): Planning 

To understand Mimosa ’s planning layer , it is essential to distinguish between the notions of goal and task .A goal is a high-level scientific objective with substantial scope and complexity. Achieving a goal typically requires long-horizon planning and the coordinated execution of multiple heterogeneous tasks [ 28 , 50 ]. Goals are usually domain-specific and problem-driven, and they define what is to be achieved. In contrast, a task is a granular, well-defined, and repeatable operation that contributes to the completion of a goal [50 ]. Tasks are generally learnable, reusable across different goals, and often appear in multiple scientific workflows. Tasks define how progress toward a goal is made. For example, the goal "Develop a machine learning model to predict pro-tein–ligand binding affinity" can be decomposed into several distinct tasks, such as: (i) conducting a literature review on existing binding-affinity prediction meth-ods, (ii) acquiring and preprocessing datasets from public repositories, (iii) imple-menting and training a specific machine learning algorithm, and (iv) evaluating model performance using standardized benchmarks. Each individual task is then given as a prompt for the meta-orchestration layer (Layer 2), which learns an optimal workflow for the task through iterative improvement. Over successive executions, this layer refines its strategy based on previous outcomes, enabling more efficient and reliable task completion. The planning layer in Mimosa is optional and the system can operate either in goal or task mode. In goal mode, a planning component decomposes high-level objectives into multiple tasks, each of which is dispatched to the 

meta-orchestrator . In task mode, the planning layer is bypassed entirely: each prompt is treated as a single, self-contained task and directly handled by the 

meta-orchestrator .Since this work focuses on demonstrating the impact of evolution at the individual task level, all evaluations are conducted in task mode. In this setting, the planning layer is omitted, and each prompt is considered as a single, learnable task without explicit goal decomposition. Each task is solved by a custom multi-agent workflow created or evolved by the meta-orchestrator .11 Figure 1: The Mimosa Framework. The system operates through five sequential layers: (0) Divide into sub-tasks — the planner divides the user objective into sub-tasks; (1) Discover Tools — available MCP servers are scanned and enumerated via Toolomics ; (2) Initialize Workflow — the archive is queried for a similar prior task, and the best matching workflow is retrieved or synthesized from scratch; (3) Execute Workflow — specialized agents execute the task using discovered relevant tools; (4) Evaluate Workflow — a judge scores the execution and the meta-orchestrator mutates the workflow for the next iteration; the evaluated workflow is archived, and the loop repeats until the judge score exceeds 0.9 or the predefined number of iterations is reached. 12 3.2.2 Layer 1: Tool Discovery 

To achieve modularity, Mimosa leverages MCP [ 17 ]2 for standardized tool integration. Tool discovery is operationalized through Toolomics , a companion project we developed for automated management of MCP servers, which exposes computational tools as discoverable services and allows users to easily integrate custom tools for specific research needs. Before executing a task, the system scans predefined port ranges on local networks to identify available MCP servers. This architecture enables distributed computation across HPC clusters, cloud services, and laboratory instruments via MCP’s standardized interface. It supports horizontal scalability: new computational tools (statistical analysis, ML pipelines, wet-lab automation) are registered as MCP servers in Toolomics 

without modifying Mimosa ’s core orchestration logic. Because each tool runs as an independent server, computationally intensive operations can be offloaded to dedicated high-performance instances, and multiple agents can invoke tools in parallel without competing for local resources. 

Toolomics also enables multi-tenancy through isolated workspaces and per-server resource allocation, which is critical to avoid dependency conflicts and support collaborative scenarios where multiple Mimosa instances operate si-multaneously. This containerised, workspace-isolated design also mitigates the expanded attack surface inherent in MCP-based tool exposure [ 51 ], enforcing sandboxing at the server level rather than relying on conservative tool enablement alone. 

3.2.3 Layer 2: Meta-Orchestration 

The core of Mimosa ’s adaptability lies in its meta-orchestrator , which dynamically generates and refines multi-agent workflows through iterative local search. Rather than relying on static pipeline definitions, the system synthesizes specialized multi-agent architectures on-demand and greedily refines successful patterns to optimize future performance. 

Workflow Initialization via Case-Based Retrieval. When presented with a new task (defined by user input in task mode or by the planner in goal mode), the system first scans specified port ranges to discover available tools exposed as MCP servers by Toolomics . The full set of discovered tools is presented to the meta-orchestrator , which assigns task-relevant subsets to individual agents during workflow synthesis; these allocations are part of the workflow definition and can be modified by subsequent mutations. The meta-orchestrator then queries the workflow archive for prior executions with semantically similar task prompts using embedding-based similarity match-ing. Specifically, it retrieves the single highest-scoring workflow among those exceeding a similarity threshold of 0.7.   

> 2Specification: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-03-26 ;source:
> https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol

13 If such a workflow exists, a high-capability LLM (e.g., Claude Opus 4.5) mutates this workflow via a single modification, adjusting agent prompts, adding or removing agents, rewiring communication edges. If no sufficiently similar workflow exists in the archive, the system synthesizes a workflow from scratch based on the task description alone. 3

All workflows are encoded as directed graphs using the LangGraph frame-work [ 52 ]. Nodes represent either SmolAgent [ 53 ] instances (autonomous code-generating agents for complex reasoning and tool interaction) or deterministic Python functions serving as validation gates and conditional flow control. This architecture balances the flexibility of agents with the reliability of explicit control logic. 

Greedy Iterative Refinement. The judge evaluates the execution trajectory across four criteria: goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality, and answer plausibility, and computes an overall score as their average. Without access to ground truth, this last criterion assesses the internal consistency and domain-appropriateness of the output rather than its factual correctness; the risk of rewarding plausible but wrong answers is an inherent limitation of LLM-based evaluation and is discussed in Section 7. In learning mode, the system performs single-incumbent search on the current task. At each iteration, the meta-orchestrator ingests the best-performing workflow observed so far, along with its execution trace and the judge ’s structured feedback. Based on this feedback, the meta-orchestrator proposes a single targeted modification to generate a mutated workflow, which is then executed and scored. This procedure continues for a predefined number of iterations, constituting a bounded refinement loop rather than open-ended evolutionary search. Only the single incumbent generates offspring; exploration is strictly local, targeting task-specific improvement within a fixed computational budget. All evaluated workflows are archived, enabling retrieval and adaptation for similar tasks. Figure 2 illustrates this four-step loop: the meta-orchestrator mutates the current incumbent workflow to produce a candidate workflow; agent nodes execute it; the judge evaluates the resulting execution trace and returns structured feedback with an overall score; and the candidate is archived while the highest-scoring workflow observed so far is retained as the new incumbent. If the candidate does not improve the score, the previous incumbent is kept unchanged. The loop runs for a predefined number of iterations or terminates early when the judge score reaches 0.9. 

3.2.4 Layer 3: Agent Execution 

Agents in synthesized workflows are executed by SmolAgent instances: Hugging Face’s code-generating agents that use Python as their native action language [ 53 ].   

> 3In our ScienceAgentBench evaluation, the diversity of tasks meant all workflows were synthesized via this de novo path. See Section 7.

14 Figure 2: Iterative workflow refinement via single-incumbent search. (1) Mutate Incumbent Workflow — at each iteration, the meta-orchestrator takes the best-performing workflow observed so far (the incumbent) together with its evaluation feedback and proposes a single local modification to generate a mutated workflow. (2) Execute Workflow — each node in the workflow is executed by a SmolAgent CodeAgent instance. (3) Evaluate Workflow — the judge evaluates the resulting execution trace across goal alignment, collaboration efficiency, output quality, and answer plausibility, and returns structured feedback with an overall score. (4) Archive and Select Incumbent — the evaluated workflow is archived, and the highest-scoring workflow observed so far is retained as the incumbent for the next iteration. If the new workflow does not improve the score, the previous incumbent is kept. The cycle repeats for a predefined number of iterations or until the judge score exceeds 0.9. 15 Execution is Python-centric at the SmolAgent runtime, but non-Python code such as R can be invoked indirectly through MCP tools or shell commands when those tools are available. For example, an R-based statistical pipeline can be containerised as an MCP server, allowing agents to invoke it as a standard tool call without requiring native R support in the SmolAgent runtime. Rather than generating JSON or text representations of tool calls, these agents directly write and execute Python code snippets to invoke MCP-exposed tools, perform computations, and orchestrate multi-step workflows. This code-as-actions design is more expressive than schema-constrained JSON tool calls and has been shown to improve tool-use efficiency and success rates in complex agent tasks [ 54 ]. Concretely, a JSON-based agent calling a docking tool can only pass parameters that the tool schema anticipates, whereas a code-generating agent can preprocess inputs, loop over parameter grids, filter intermediate results, and chain multiple library calls within a single reasoning step — all without requiring each operation to be pre-registered as a distinct tool. For scientific discovery, this approach [ 54 ] offers concrete advantages. Agents can perform inline calculations to configure instruments dynamically, for instance, iterating through a combinatorial search space testing hundreds of parameter combinations within a single execution step. Code execution enables native data analysis: agents process raw experimental outputs directly in python, extracting meaningful signals without intermediate parsing. Variables serve as reliable information storage, allowing agents to store computed values, numerical results, and intermediate findings. This integration of reasoning, computation, and tool orchestration within executable code enables agents to operate with rigor and precision that scientific tools demand. This code execution model further grants agents direct access to the rich ecosystem of established scientific informatics libraries. Agents can import and invoke domain-specific tools such as RDKit for cheminformatics and molecular modeling, BioPython for sequence analysis and structural biology, or scikit-learn for statistical learning and predictive modeling. By leveraging these mature, validated libraries within their execution context, agents can compose sophisticated analytical workflows from tools that the scientific community has refined over decades. Mimosa decouples model selection across pipeline stages and supports plug-gable execution backends, including remote APIs and local inference. Imple-mentation details, including supported backends and current limitations, are described in the LLM Configuration paragraph of Section 5. 

3.2.5 Layer 4: Evaluation 

An LLM-as-a-judge [ 49 ] (hereafter, judge ) performs offline evaluation of com-pleted (or prematurely terminated) multi-agent workflow executions to guide the learning process. This evaluation occurs immediately following the execution of all agents in a workflow, or upon termination due to error, before any subsequent iteration begins. We adopt LLM-as-a-judge as a scalable heuristic supervision 16 signal, while recognizing an active methodological literature on judge reliability and bias [55]. The judge assesses performance against four objective criteria: 1. Goal Alignment (0.0-1.0): Measures the extent to which the execution fulfilled the defined objectives without deviation. 2. Agent Collaboration (0.0-1.0): Assesses the correctness of inter-agent data flow and error handling. 3. Output Quality (0.0-1.0): Analyzes completeness, formatting, and structural validity. 4. Answer Plausibility (0.0-1.0): Verifies factual accuracy against ground truth when available. Otherwise, assesses logical soundness and theoretical plausibility. The judge produces structured feedback, citing specific evidence from execu-tion traces (e.g., JSON state paths, error logs) to justify scores. This feedback is ingested by the meta-orchestrator , which proposes targeted workflow mutations as described in Section 3.2.3. While this judge provides directional signals sufficient for greedy workflow refinement, it serves exclusively as an internal optimization objective. Whether a task is actually solved is determined independently by the benchmark’s program-matic evaluation scripts, which compare agent outputs against gold-standard results without any reference to judge scores (see Section 4.1.4). The open ques-tion is not whether the reported Success Rates (SR) are valid — they are, since they are computed externally — but whether the judge signal is sample-efficient :i.e., how tightly judge scores correlate with benchmark Success Rate at the per-task level. Quantifying this correlation is discussed in Section 7. 

# 4 Experiments 

## 4.1 Setup 

4.1.1 Benchmarks choice 

We evaluate Mimosa on one established benchmark targeting distinct capabilities along the spectrum of ASR: ScienceAgentBench .

ScienceAgentBench [ 44 ] comprises 102 data-driven discoveries tasks ex-tracted from 44 peer-reviewed publications across four scientific disciplines: bioinformatics, computational chemistry, geographic information science, and psychology/cognitive neuroscience. Each task represents a discrete, well-defined operation within a data-driven discovery workflow: data preprocessing, model training, or statistical analysis validated by nine subject matter experts. 17 Crucially, the benchmark emphasizes task-level assessment over end-to-end automation claims, aligning with our objective of demonstrating learning at the individual task granularity. The benchmark’s standardized metrics (Valid Execution Rate, Success Rate, CodeBERTScore) and programmatic evaluation enable rigorous comparison of workflow variants across iterative refinement cycles. We operate in task mode 

(planning layer disabled) to isolate the contribution of the orchestration layer ’s self-improvement mechanism. 

4.1.2 Models 

Both the meta-orchestrator and judge use claude-opus-4-5-20251101 for work-flow generation and LLM-as-a-judge for scoring workflow performance. Agent execution models vary by experiment and are specified in each re-sults table: (i) GPT-4o (OpenAI API), (ii) DeepSeek-V3.2 (DeepSeek API, 

deepseek-chat ), (iii) Mistral-Large-2407 (OpenRouter), and (iv) Claude Haiku (Anthropic API). 

4.1.3 Execution Modes 

We compare three execution configurations: 

Single-Agent: A standalone HuggingFace CodeAgent executes with a prompt near-identical to those used per-agent in multi-agent workflows, with access to the full aggregated MCP tool set. This baseline isolates single-model performance from the effects of multi-agent decomposition. 

Multi-Agent (One-Shot): The meta-orchestrator generates a workflow from scratch without subsequent refinement. This isolates the value of multi-agent decomposition independent of iterative learning. 

Multi-Agent (Iterative-Learning): The meta-orchestrator generates an initial workflow, then iteratively refines it based on execution feedback. Refinement runs for up to 10 iterations with early stopping when the judge score reaches 0.9. 

4.1.4 ScienceAgentBench Evaluation 

We evaluate Mimosa on all 102 available tasks spanning diverse scientific domains. We adopt three of the four metrics defined by the benchmark authors: - Success Rate (SR) is our primary evaluation metric, as it directly measures whether agents accomplish the underlying scientific objective. SR evaluates whether task outputs satisfy domain-specific success criteria, determined by comparing agent predictions against gold-standard results using task-specific evaluation scripts. Crucially, SR is computed entirely independently of the LLM-based judge scores that guide workflow refinement internally (Section 3.2.5): the judge drives the iterative optimization loop, while SR provides external, ground-truth validation. - CodeBERTScore (CBS) quantifies semantic similarity between generated and reference implementations. We compute contextual embeddings using 18 CodeBERT, construct a cosine similarity matrix between token representations, and derive an F1 score via greedy matching. - Cost tracks cumulative expenditure from LLM API calls during task execu-tion, reported in USD. For each task, we execute the following procedure: (1) load task instructions and associated files, (2) execute the task using Mimosa , (3) transfer generated artifacts to an isolated evaluation capsule, (4) compute SR using the task-specific evaluation script, (5) compute CBS against the reference implementation, and (6) record API costs. All execution occurs within sandboxed containers to ensure isolation between tasks. We note a methodological difference with the published ScienceAgentBench 

baselines: Chen et al. [ 44 ] repeat each task three times and report the best outcome (selected by maximum SR, then VER, then CBS, then minimum Cost), whereas Mimosa reports single-execution results. The iterative-learning configuration partially offsets this asymmetry, as its evolution loop evaluates up to 10 workflow variants per task and retains the best-performing one. The single-agent and one-shot configurations carry no such mechanism, making their comparison against best-of-three baselines conservative. Multi-seed replication is discussed in Section 7. For all experiments, Mimosa is operated in task mode, without decomposing tasks into sub-tasks. We evaluate Mimosa under the three execution modes defined in Section 4.1.3 (not to be confused with task or goal modes): (1) single-agent, (2) one-shot multi-agent, and (3) iterative-learning. In all modes, individual agent nodes are executed as SmolAgent CodeAgent instances. We emphasize that despite the workflow archive mechanism described in Section 3.2.3, the diversity of ScienceAgentBench tasks is such that no prior candidate satisfied the similarity threshold of 0.7 for any evaluated task. Conse-quently, both one-shot and iterative-learning modes generate workflows de novo from task prompts alone, without retrieval from the archive. This ensures that re-ported performance reflects per-task workflow synthesis rather than accumulated benchmark-specific knowledge. The semantic diversity of ScienceAgentBench 

means that the case-based retrieval and mutation pathway — fully implemented in Mimosa ’s meta-orchestration layer — was not exercised in these experiments. Evaluating this mechanism on tasks with genuine semantic overlap, including through synthetic task variants, is a natural next step (see Section 7). SmolAgent’s CodeAgent enables iterative reasoning through its code-based action space: the agent can generate code that evaluates intermediate results, detects errors, and makes several attempts all within a single execution trace. Individual agents are limited to 64 steps when operating as components within a multi-agent workflow (modes 2 and 3), and 256 steps when operating in single-agent mode. In Iterative-learning mode, refinement runs for up to 10 iterations, with early stopping triggered when the judge score reaches 0.9. In the single-agent setting, a standalone SmolAgent CodeAgent receives the full aggregated MCP tool set and the task prompt directly, running in the same sandboxed execution environment as the multi-agent configurations. This 19 mode removes agent decomposition and inter-agent routing, but not tool access, isolating the contribution of workflow structure from that of tool availability. We note, however, that this comparison does not control for environment setup: in all modes, agents are responsible for installing dependencies and configuring their execution environment, which differs from the pre-configured environments used in ScienceAgentBench ’s reported baselines (see Section 5 for details on this confound). 

## 4.2 ScienceAgentBench Results 

We report our results on ScienceAgentBench in Table 1. Each individual value (SR, CBS, Cost) is the mean value across all 102 tasks. For single-agent runs, re-ported costs reflect agent execution alone. For multi-agent and iterative-learning runs, costs additionally include workflow generation and judge evaluation, both performed by claude-opus-4-5-20251101 . Per-component cost breakdown was not tracked separately, but meta-orchestrator and judge costs are expected to be minor relative to agent execution. Table 1: Performance comparison of Mimosa using different models on Sci-enceAgentBench .Mode Model SuccessRate CodeBERT Cost/Task (SR) (%) (CBS) (%) ($) GPT-4o 3.8 0.607 0.56 Single Agent DeepSeek-V3.2 38.2 0.898 0.05 

(SmolAgent) Mistral-Large-2407 13.5 0.681 1.3 Claude Haiku 4.5 7.8 0.57 1.46 GPT-4o 18.6 0.640 1Multi-Agent DeepSeek-V3.2 32.4 0.794 0.38 One-shot Mistral-Large-2407 – – –Claude Haiku 4.5 31.3 0.773 2.2 GPT-4o 21.6 0.721 3.5 Iterative DeepSeek-V3.2 43.1 0.921 1.7 Learning Mistral-Large-2407 – – –Claude Haiku 4.5 30.3 0.885 7.8 Table 1 reveals distinct architectural sensitivities across model families. The transition from single-agent to multi-agent configurations produces heteroge-neous performance trajectories: GPT-4o and Claude Haiku 4.5 demonstrate approximately 4 × success rate improvements (from 3.8% to 18.6% and from 7.8% to 31.3% respectively), while DeepSeek-V3.2 exhibits a different pattern. Despite a strong single-agent baseline of 38.2%, performance initially degrades under static multi-agent orchestration to 32.4% before surpassing the baseline through iterative-learning at 43.1%. The iterative-learning paradigm shows 20 model-dependent efficacy. DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves the strongest gains: 33% rela-tive SR improvement (from 32.4% to 43.1%) and substantial CBS enhancement (from 0.794 to 0.921), suggesting effective exploitation of evolutionary workflow optimization. GPT-4o demonstrates moderate iterative-learning gains (15% rela-tive improvement), while Claude Haiku 4.5 exhibits marginal degradation (from 31.3% to 30.3%), indicating that iterative-learning benefits are not universal but rather contingent on model-specific architectural priors. Full evaluation of Mistral-Large-2407 is deferred to a future revision. 

Reward gains across iterations. Beyond per-model comparisons, we exam-ine how workflow performance evolves across successive refinement iterations. Figure 3 plots the average reward gains that evolution yields. We find consistent positive gains across iterations 1–8, followed by diminishing returns. The persistent positive gains demonstrate that each evolution cycle, on average, refines and enhances workflow performance. Iteration 10, on the other hand, shows the first negative gain, potentially indicating a performance ceiling of our current approach. 

Figure 3: Reward gains from successive evolution iterations. Average change in reward relative to the previous iteration with SEM error bars. Data is pooled across runs from all evaluated models (GPT-4o, DeepSeek-V3.2, Claude Haiku 4.5); per-model breakdowns are discussed in the text. We note that this curve aggregates reward trajectories across all evaluated models. As shown in Table 1, models respond heterogeneously to iterative refinement: DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves substantial gains through evolution (32.4% 21 to 43.1% SR), while Claude Haiku 4.5 exhibits marginal degradation (31.3% to 30.3%). The pooled curve therefore represents an average trend that may not reflect any individual model’s trajectory. Per-model reward gain breakdowns are left to future work. 

# 5 Discussion 

Our results demonstrate the potential of iteratively refining multi-agent workflow topologies for computational scientific tasks, contributing toward more capable ASR systems. While our evaluation targets individual computational tasks rather than the full scientific research cycle, these results establish foundational capabilities for broader ASR and provide the community with a framework applicable to a range of scientific computing applications. 

Archive retrieval and workflow transfer. While all workflows in this evalu-ation were generated de novo due to the semantic diversity of ScienceAgentBench 

tasks, Mimosa ’s case-based retrieval mechanism is fully implemented and offers a promising pathway for accelerating workflow synthesis. In scientific practice, researchers routinely encounter tasks that share structural similarities with prior analyses — for instance, applying the same statistical pipeline to a new dataset, or adapting a preprocessing workflow to a related organism. The archive retrieval mechanism is designed precisely for such scenarios, enabling workflow transfer and mutation rather than repeated synthesis from scratch. Systematic evaluation of this capability using synthetic, expert-designed task variants represents a natural extension of the present work (see Section 7). 

Average judge reward gain across iteration. The persistent positive gains across iterations 1–8 (Figure 3) confirm that each evolution cycle, on average, refines workflow performance. However, diminishing returns after iteration 8 and the first negative gain at iteration 10 suggest the onset of a performance ceiling. This saturation is consistent with the expected behaviour of single-incumbent search, where only the current best workflow is refined at each step and no alternative candidate workflows are maintained in parallel. Without a diverse pool of candidates, such a strategy tends to exhaust nearby improvements and stall — a pattern observed by the Darwin Gödel Machine [ 39 ], which similarly reports performance saturation around iteration 10 when evolution operates without open-ended exploration. Moving beyond this ceiling requires exploration mechanisms that maintain multiple workflow populations simultaneously, as discussed in Section 7. 

Architecture interaction insights. The heterogeneous performance trajec-tories reported in Table 1 challenge the assumption that multi-agent decom-position is universally beneficial. Whether a model’s capabilities are amplified or disrupted by hierarchical orchestration appears to depend on its underlying instruction-following robustness. For models with weaker single-agent baselines 22 (GPT-4o, Claude Haiku 4.5), shorter-horizon subgoals introduced by multi-agent decomposition appear to compensate for instruction-following limitations in the HuggingFace CodeAgent framework. In contrast, DeepSeek-V3.2’s strong single-agent performance suggests robust instruction-following that is temporar-ily disrupted by static multi-agent coordination but ultimately benefits from adaptive iterative-learning. The iterative-learning paradigm likewise reveals model-specific sensitivities. Evolutionary workflow optimization yields substantial gains only for models with sufficient instruction-following robustness to exploit hierarchical feedback signals; for others, the additional computational overhead is not justified. We postulate that these patterns reflect differences in pretraining and reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) regimes that shape each model’s capacity to leverage orchestration structure. The results suggest that optimal ASR architectures must be designed with model capabilities in mind rather than applied uniformly. 

Single-agent baseline gap and environment confound. Our single-agent results underperform ScienceAgentBench reported baselines (e.g., GPT-4o: 3.8% vs. 22.6% SR). We attribute this gap primarily to a difference in execution environment: ScienceAgentBench baselines operate within pre-configured envi-ronments with all required dependencies installed, whereas Mimosa delegates full environment setup — including package installation, path resolution, and dependency management — to the agents themselves. This design choice, consis-tent with Mimosa ’s goal of end-to-end autonomy, means that the improvement observed when moving from single-agent to multi-agent configurations reflects both more robust environment handling by specialized agents and the benefits of task decomposition, with the relative contribution of each factor not yet isolated. This confound does not invalidate the iterative-learning results, which improve over the multi-agent one-shot baseline under identical environment conditions. However, it means that the absolute single-agent–to–multi-agent gap overstates the contribution of workflow decomposition alone. In contrast, the one-shot to iterative-learning comparison is unconfounded, as both modes share identical environment conditions. A controlled comparison using pre-configured single-agent environments is needed to disentangle these factors. That said, the iterative-learning results with DeepSeek-V3.2 compare favorably to the best previously reported scores on ScienceAgentBench [44 ] (noting the evaluation asymmetry discussed above: single-execution vs. best-of-three), suggesting that workflow evolution provides genuine improvements beyond environment handling. 

LLM Configuration. Mimosa decouples model selection across pipeline stages: planning, prompt synthesis, workflow generation, and post-hoc evaluation each expose independent configuration fields. Planning, generation, and evalua-tion stages route through a shared LiteLLM wrapper ( LLMProvider ), while executor agents are instantiated via Hugging Face SmolAgents with pluggable backends—LiteLLM, MLX (for Apple Silicon M1–M5), Hugging Face Inference 23 Client, or OpenAI-compatible APIs. This architecture supports heterogeneous execution (remote APIs alongside local inference), though all agents within a single workflow currently share one executor model/backend. Native Ollama and vLLM adapters are not yet implemented. 

Performance-cost tradeoffs. DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves the strongest iterative-learning results (43.1% SR) at $1.7 per task; a competitive performance at half GPT-4o’s cost and one fifth of Claude Haiku 4.5. However, efficiency patterns diverge sharply: DeepSeek-V3.2 single-agent mode offers exceptional value ($0.05/task, 38.2% SR), while its iterative-learning cost increases 34 × for a 4.9 percentage-point absolute SR gain ( ∼13% relative improvement). GPT-4o demonstrates the steepest efficiency curve in multi-agent orchestration, yielding 4.9 × SR improvement (3.8% to 18.6%) at merely 1.8 × cost increase ($0.56 to $1.0). These patterns suggest optimal resource allocation depends on model-architecture pairing rather than universal prescriptions. 

Potential implications for resource efficiency. A further consideration concerns the resource efficiency of current ASR approaches. The prevailing emphasis on scaling to ever-larger, more expensive reasoning models carries substantial environmental and financial costs. On ScienceAgentBench , the best previously reported result uses OpenAI o1-preview with Self-Debug, achieving 42.2% SR—but at a per-token cost of $15/$60 per million input/output tokens at the time of the benchmark, which the benchmark authors themselves note represents “more than 10 times the cost of other LLMs” [ 44 ]. Mimosa achieves a comparable 43.1% SR using DeepSeek-V3.2, whose per-token cost ($0.56/$1.68 per million input/output tokens) is approximately 27 × lower on input and 36 ×

lower on output than o1-preview. While Mimosa ’s iterative workflow consumes more total tokens per task, yielding a higher per-task cost ($1.7 vs. $0.64), this overhead is a property of the current greedy search strategy rather than an intrinsic architectural limitation. Additionally, Mimosa handles full environment setup—including dependency installation and path resolution—as part of each task execution, an overhead absent from benchmark baselines that operate in pre-configured environments (Section 5). More broadly, multi-agent architectures offer a potential pathway toward frugal scientific AI: by decomposing workflows into specialized subtasks, future systems might distribute cognitive load across smaller, cheaper models while leveraging established domain-specific tools refined over decades of scientific computing. Whether such decomposition can systematically match frontier reasoning model performance at substantially reduced computational and envi-ronmental cost remains an important open question. By offloading execution and iterative optimization to such platforms, researchers can devote more attention to higher-level scientific activities—experimental design, hypothesis generation, interpretation, and critical evaluation—while retaining the judgment and con-textual understanding required to steer and assess automated processes. Conversely, a systematic evaluation of recent high-capability reasoning models 24 within Mimosa ’s iterative-learning framework would be equally informative. The strong performance ceiling observed with DeepSeek-V3.2 (a non-reasoning model) suggests that models with native chain-of-thought capabilities may yield further gains, particularly on tasks where single-step agent reasoning currently limits workflow progress. Such evaluations represent a natural complement to this direction: understanding both the upper bound achievable with frontier models and the lower bound of model cost at which competitive performance is maintained will be essential for guiding practical deployment of AI-assisted scientific research. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We presented Mimosa , a framework toward autonomous scientific research that adapts to available tools and iteratively refines multi-agent workflows for compu-tational scientific tasks. Unlike static multi-agent systems, Mimosa combines adaptability during workflow evolution with predictability once refinement con-verges, yielding workflows that are both empirically optimized and stable for reuse. 

Mimosa provides the scientific community a framework and toolset for helping conduct in-depth computational research, such as data analysis, statistical modeling, and simulation workflows. Both Mimosa and Toolomics are released as open-source software under the Apache License 2.0. On the ScienceAgentBench benchmark, we achieved 43% success rate us-ing DeepSeek-V3.2, validating the core hypothesis that evolving workflows can enhance autonomous research capabilities of agentic systems. The observed performance variance across models and the differing returns across configura-tions further reveal informative architecture-model interactions, suggesting that optimal ASR architectures must be designed with model capabilities in mind. We discuss remaining open questions and concrete directions for future work in Section 7. More broadly, Mimosa advocates a paradigm shift in scientific AI: from brittle, expert-designed pipelines to adaptive multi-agent frameworks that learn from experience. Population-based or open-ended evolutionary strategies remain a natural direction for future work. 

# 7 Limitations and Future work 

We identify several directions where the current evaluation can be extended, and outline concrete plans for each: - Judge feedback signal refinement remains an important limitation: the 

judge provides directional but coarse-grained feedback, and LLM-as-a-judge systems are known to exhibit biases including position bias, self-preference bias, and sensitivity to evaluation framing [ 49 , 55 ]. Crucially, this concern pertains to the efficiency of the search process, not to the validity of reported results, since 25 Success Rate is evaluated by benchmark-provided scripts entirely independently of judge scoring (Section 3.2.5). The SR improvements observed under iterative learning (Table 1) provide indirect evidence that the judge ’s directional signal is sufficient to guide evolution toward better task outcomes. A key next step is to quantify this correlation and to strengthen reliability through judge calibration, cross-model adjudication, and direct validation against benchmark outcomes. - Cross-model configuration for meta-orchestrator and judge : A related aspect worth noting is that the current implementation uses the same model for both workflow proposal (orchestrator) and execution evaluation ( judge ). While these roles operate on distinct outputs — the meta-orchestrator proposes a workflow structure, while the judge evaluates the resulting agent execution trace — it remains an open question whether using the same model introduces self-reinforcing optimization tendencies. Cross-model configurations, where orchestration and evaluation are handled by architecturally distinct models, offer a natural avenue to investigate this. - Cross-task generalization: While the workflow archive enables retrieval of prior workflows for similar tasks (Section 3.2.3), the meta-orchestrator does not yet extract abstract design principles from past experience — such as which mutation types, agent configurations, or tool combinations tend to succeed across task families. Learning such generalizable patterns would enable more efficient exploration of the workflow search space and represents a prerequisite for true meta-learning. - From greedy refinement to open-ended exploration: As discussed in Sec-tion 5, the current single-incumbent search strategy tends to plateau after approximately eight iterations, motivating the adoption of population-based exploration mechanisms. - Mutation and judge optimization: Analyzing which mutation types most frequently drive score improvements, and tuning judge criterion weightings and the early-stopping threshold, offer straightforward avenues to improve search efficiency—though the heterogeneous model responses reported in Table 1 suggest these optima may themselves be model-dependent. - Multi-seed replication and per-model analysis: All reported results reflect single-execution runs. Replicating all configurations with three independent seeds is needed to establish variance estimates and strengthen comparisons against published best-of-three baselines. Similarly, per-model reward gain breakdowns would reveal whether the saturation pattern observed in Figure 3 is universal or model-specific. - Single-agent baseline and environment setup: Mimosa delegates environ-ment setup entirely to agents, consistent with its goal of end-to-end autonomy, unlike ScienceAgentBench baselines which operate in pre-configured environ-ments. This difference means the apparent benefit of multi-agent decomposition includes contributions from improved environment handling. A systematic failure categorization of single-agent logs and a controlled rerun with pre-configured environments are needed to isolate the true contribution of workflow decomposi-tion from improved environment handling. This analysis is planned alongside the multi-seed replication described in Section 4.1.4. 26 - Archive retrieval scope: The case-based retrieval mechanism is fully imple-mented and integrated into Mimosa ’s meta-orchestration layer, enabling new workflows to be bootstrapped from semantically similar prior tasks. The diversity of ScienceAgentBench tasks meant that no task pair exceeded the 0.7 similarity threshold during evaluation, so all reported results reflect de novo workflow synthesis. This represents an opportunity rather than a limitation: validating whether retrieval and mutation of prior workflows accelerates convergence or improves performance over de novo synthesis is a natural next step. We are developing a synthetic evaluation dataset (described below) to systematically test this capability. Future work will be focused on the following directions: - Investigating evaluation methodologies that yield informative judge feed-back signals, enabling reliable performance tracking and theoretically grounded optimization directions. This includes exploring cross-model meta-orchestrator –judge configurations to evaluate whether self-reinforcing tendencies arise in workflow optimization. - Incorporating domain-grounded skill acquisition [ 41 , 56 ]: extracting tool co-occurrence patterns and canonical computational step sequences from published methods sections, tool documentation, and community-maintained protocols to bootstrap the workflow archive with domain-informed templates, reducing reliance on de novo synthesis for well-established analytical pipelines. - Constructing a persistent memory architecture that encodes not only suc-cessful workflow patterns but also structured failure diagnostics—such as re-curring error types, problematic tool–task associations, and ineffective agent configurations—enabling the meta-orchestrator to avoid known-bad design choices and accelerate convergence on novel tasks. - Adopting open-ended strategies that maintain multiple workflow popula-tions simultaneously, replacing single-incumbent refinement with exploration mechanisms that avoid premature convergence. - Evaluating Mimosa on lightweight (<70B) open-source models to determine whether task decomposition enables competitive performance at substantially reduced computational and environmental cost. - Reproducibility evaluation: Mimosa ’s fully logged, archiveable execution traces and tool-agnostic workflow design establish conditions that could, in future work, support the independent replication of computational analyses from published studies. This capability is not evaluated in the present work, which focuses instead on individual scientific computing tasks. A natural next step is therefore to design a controlled study in which Mimosa attempts to independently replicate the computational analyses of published findings, assessing both the feasibility of end-to-end reproduction and the fidelity of reproduced results against original outputs. 27 8 Author Contributions 

M.L., T.J. and L.-F.N. conceptualized the study. M.L., T.J. and L.-F.N. devel-oped the methodology. M.L., T.J., B.N, and M.F. implemented the software. M.L., T.J., E.D. and L.-F.N. tested the method across application cases. L.-F.N. and E.D. acquired funding. L.-F.N. supervised the project. M.L., T.J. and L.-F.N. wrote the original draft of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 

# 9 Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the French government through the France 2030 investment plan via the MetaboLinkAI bilateral project (ANR-24-CE93-0012-01 and SNSF 10002786), the 3IA Côte d’Azur programme (ANR-23-IACL-0001), ANR-22-CPJ2-0048-01, and ANR-22-CE29-0026-03 (DREAMY). Additional support was provided through the UCAJEDI Investments in the Future project (ANR-15-IDEX-01). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or manuscript preparation. 

# 10 Ethics Statement 

This study did not involve human participants, animal subjects, or the use of personal data. All datasets and benchmarks are publicly available and used in accordance with their respective licenses. 

Use of AI-assisted technologies. During the preparation of this work, the authors used large language models (including tools from Anthropic, DeepSeek, Google, Mistral, and OpenAI) to accelerate software development and to improve the readability and style of the manuscript. The use of LLMs as components of the Mimosa framework itself is documented in Sections 3 and 4. All AI-generated suggestions for code and text were critically reviewed, verified, and edited by the authors. The authors take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

# 11 Competing interests 

F.G. is cofounder and co-scientific advisor of :probabl. All other authors declare no competing interests. 

# References 

[1] Eva M. Campo, Sadasivan Shankar, Alexander S. Szalay, and Robert J. Hanisch. Now Is the Time to Build a National Data Ecosystem for Materials 28 Science and Chemistry Research Data. ACS Omega , 7(16):13398–13402, April 2022. [2] Alberto Cambrosio, Jonah Campbell, Etienne Vignola-Gagné, Peter Keating, Bertrand R. Jordan, and Pascale Bourret. ‘Overcoming the Bottleneck’: Knowledge Architectures for Genomic Data Interpretation in Oncology. In Sabina Leonelli and Niccolò Tempini, editors, Data Journeys in the Sciences ,pages 305–327. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020. [3] Bonnie Berger and Yun William Yu. Navigating bottlenecks and trade-offs in genomic data analysis. Nature Reviews Genetics , 24(4):235–250, April 2023. [4] Yolanda Gil, Mark Greaves, James Hendler, and Haym Hirsh. Amplify scientific discovery with artificial intelligence. Science , 346(6206):171–172, 2014. [5] Monya Baker. 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature ,533(7604):452–454, May 2016. [6] John P. A. Ioannidis. Why Most Published Research Findings Are False. 

PLoS Medicine , 2(8):e124, 2005. [7] Brett K. Beaulieu-Jones and Casey S. Greene. Reproducibility of computa-tional workflows is automated using continuous analysis. Nature Biotech-nology , 35(4):342–346, 2017. [8] Gary Tom, Stefan P. Schmid, Sterling G. Baird, Yang Cao, Kourosh Darvish, Han Hao, Stanley Lo, Sergio Pablo-García, Ella M. Rajaonson, Marta Skreta, Naruki Yoshikawa, Samantha Corapi, Gun Deniz Akkoc, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Martin Seifrid, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Self-Driving Laboratories for Chemistry and Materials Science. Chemical Reviews , 124(16):9633–9732, 2024. PMID: 39137296. [9] Tao Song, Man Luo, Xiaolong Zhang, Linjiang Chen, Yan Huang, Jiaqi Cao, Qing Zhu, Daobin Liu, Baicheng Zhang, Gang Zou, Guoqing Zhang, Fei Zhang, Weiwei Shang, Yao Fu, Jun Jiang, and Yi Luo. A Multiagent-Driven Robotic AI Chemist Enabling Autonomous Chemical Research On Demand. Journal of the American Chemical Society , 147(15):12534–12545, 2025. PMID: 40056128. [10] Jie Huang and Kevin Chen-Chuan Chang. Towards Reasoning in Large Language Models: A Survey, May 2023. arXiv:2212.10403 [cs]. [11] Jiabin Tang, Lianghao Xia, Zhonghang Li, and Chao Huang. AI-Researcher: Autonomous Scientific Innovation, May 2025. arXiv:2505.18705 [cs]. [12] Lianhao Zhou, Hongyi Ling, Cong Fu, Yepeng Huang, Michael Sun, Wendi Yu, Xiaoxuan Wang, Xiner Li, Xingyu Su, Junkai Zhang, Xiusi Chen, Chenxing Liang, Xiaofeng Qian, Heng Ji, Wei Wang, Marinka Zitnik, and 29 Shuiwang Ji. Autonomous Agents for Scientific Discovery: Orchestrating Scientists, Language, Code, and Physics, 2025. [13] Yufeng Du, Minyang Tian, Srikanth Ronanki, Subendhu Rongali, Sravan Bodapati, Aram Galstyan, Azton Wells, Roy Schwartz, Eliu A Huerta, and Hao Peng. Context Length Alone Hurts LLM Performance Despite Perfect Retrieval, 2025. [14] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilac-qua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts, 2024. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. [15] Gregory Sliwoski, Sandeepkumar Kothiwale, Jens Meiler, and Edward W. Lowe. Computational Methods in Drug Discovery. Pharmacological Reviews ,66(1):334–395, 2014. [16] Anastasiia V. Sadybekov and Vsevolod Katritch. Computational approaches streamlining drug discovery. Nature , 616(7958):673–685, 2023. [17] Anthropic. Model Context Protocol Specification. https:// modelcontextprotocol.io , 2024. Open standard for connecting AI as-sistants to external tools and data sources. [18] Jiaqi Wei, Yuejin Yang, Xiang Zhang, Yuhan Chen, Xiang Zhuang, Zhangyang Gao, Dongzhan Zhou, Guangshuai Wang, Zhiqiang Gao, Jun-tai Cao, Zijie Qiu, Ming Hu, Chenglong Ma, Shixiang Tang, Junjun He, Chunfeng Song, Xuming He, Qiang Zhang, Chenyu You, Shuangjia Zheng, Ning Ding, Wanli Ouyang, Nanqing Dong, Yu Cheng, Siqi Sun, Lei Bai, and Bowen Zhou. From AI for Science to Agentic Science: A Survey on Autonomous Scientific Discovery, October 2025. arXiv:2508.14111 [cs]. [19] Haoxuan Zhang, Ruochi Li, Yang Zhang, Ting Xiao, Jiangping Chen, Junhua Ding, and Haihua Chen. The Evolving Role of Large Language Models in Scientific Innovation: Evaluator, Collaborator, and Scientist, July 2025. arXiv:2507.11810 [cs]. [20] Yubin Kim, Ken Gu, Chanwoo Park, Chunjong Park, Samuel Schmidgall, A. Ali Heydari, Yao Yan, Zhihan Zhang, Yuchen Zhuang, Mark Malhotra, Paul Pu Liang, Hae Won Park, Yuzhe Yang, Xuhai Xu, Yilun Du, Shwetak Patel, Tim Althoff, Daniel McDuff, and Xin Liu. Towards a Science of Scaling Agent Systems, December 2025. arXiv:2512.08296 [cs]. [21] Anton Bulle Labate, Valesca Moura de Sousa, Sandro Rama Fiorini, Leonardo Guerreiro Azevedo, Raphael Melo Thiago, and Viviane Torres da Silva. Solving Context Window Overflow in AI Agents, 2025. [22] Zehong Wang, Fang Wu, Hongru Wang, Xiangru Tang, Bolian Li, Zhenfei Yin, Yijun Ma, Yiyang Li, Weixiang Sun, Xiusi Chen, and Yanfang Ye. 30 Why Reasoning Fails to Plan: A Planning-Centric Analysis of Long-Horizon Decision Making in LLM Agents, 2026. [23] Alexander V. Tobias and Adam Wahab. Autonomous ’self-driving’ labora-tories: a review of technology and policy implications. Royal Society Open Science , 12(7):250646, July 2025. [24] Nguyen Xuan-Vu, Daniel Armstrong, Milena Wehrbach, Andres M. Bran, Zlatko Jončev, and Philippe Schwaller. Synthelite: Chemist-aligned and feasibility-aware synthesis planning with LLMs, December 2025. arXiv:2512.16424 [cs]. [25] Bruno Jacob, Khushbu Agarwal, Marcel Baer, Peter Rice, and Simone Raugei. Beyond Protein Language Models: An Agentic LLM Framework for Mechanistic Enzyme Design, November 2025. arXiv:2511.19423 [q-bio]. [26] Qian Huang, Jian Vora, Percy Liang, and Jure Leskovec. MLAgentBench: Evaluating Language Agents on Machine Learning Experimentation, April 2024. arXiv:2310.03302 [cs]. [27] Yunxiang Zhang, Muhammad Khalifa, Shitanshu Bhushan, Grant D. Mur-phy, Lajanugen Logeswaran, Jaekyeom Kim, Moontae Lee, Honglak Lee, and Lu Wang. MLRC-Bench: Can Language Agents Solve Machine Learning Research Challenges?, October 2025. arXiv:2504.09702 [cs]. [28] InternAgent Team, Bo Zhang, Shiyang Feng, Xiangchao Yan, Jiakang Yuan, Runmin Ma, Yusong Hu, Zhiyin Yu, Xiaohan He, Songtao Huang, Shaowei Hou, Zheng Nie, Zhilong Wang, Jinyao Liu, Tianshuo Peng, Peng Ye, Dongzhan Zhou, Shufei Zhang, Xiaosong Wang, Yilan Zhang, Meng Li, Zhongying Tu, Xiangyu Yue, Wangli Ouyang, Bowen Zhou, and Lei Bai. InternAgent: When Agent Becomes the Scientist – Building Closed-Loop System from Hypothesis to Verification, July 2025. arXiv:2505.16938 [cs]. [29] Christoph Riedl. Emergent Coordination in Multi-Agent Language Models, 2025. [30] Yaolun Zhang, Xiaogeng Liu, and Chaowei Xiao. MetaAgent: Automatically Constructing Multi-Agent Systems Based on Finite State Machines, 2025. [31] Anthropic. How we built our multi-agent research system, June 2025. [32] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated Design of Agentic Systems, March 2025. arXiv:2408.08435 [cs]. [33] Yu Shang, Yu Li, Keyu Zhao, Likai Ma, Jiahe Liu, Fengli Xu, and Yong Li. AgentSquare: Automatic LLM Agent Search in Modular Design Space. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. arXiv:2410.06153. 31 [34] Mingchen Zhuge, Wenyi Wang, Louis Kirsch, Francesco Faccio, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. GPTSwarm: Language Agents as Optimizable Graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. arXiv:2402.16823. [35] Siyu Yuan, Kaitao Song, Jiangjie Chen, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, and De-qing Yang. EvoAgent: Towards Automatic Multi-Agent Generation via Evolutionary Algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14228 , 2024. [36] Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder: Self-Referential Self-Improvement via Prompt Evolution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. arXiv:2309.16797. [37] Qingyan Guo, Rui Wang, Junliang Guo, Bei Li, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Guoqing Liu, Jiang Bian, and Yujiu Yang. Connecting Large Language Models with Evolutionary Algorithms Yields Powerful Prompt Optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [38] Alex Sheng and Shankar Padmanabhan. Self-Programming Artificial Intelligence Using Code-Generating Language Models, February 2023. arXiv:2205.00167 [cs]. [39] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin Godel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents, September 2025. arXiv:2505.22954 [cs]. [40] Zixuan Ke, Austin Xu, Yifei Ming, Xuan-Phi Nguyen, Ryan Chin, Caiming Xiong, and Shafiq Joty. MAS-ZERO: Designing Multi-Agent Systems with Zero Supervision, December 2025. arXiv:2505.14996 [cs]. [41] Xu Huang, Junwu Chen, Yuxing Fei, Zhuohan Li, Philippe Schwaller, and Gerbrand Ceder. CASCADE: Cumulative Agentic Skill Creation through Autonomous Development and Evolution, December 2025. arXiv:2512.23880 [cs]. [42] Yutaro Yamada, Robert Tjarko Lange, Cong Lu, Shengran Hu, Chris Lu, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The AI Scientist-v2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08066 , 2025. [43] Ludovico Mitchener, Jon M. Laurent, Benjamin Tenmann, Siddharth Narayanan, Geemi P. Wellawatte, Andrew White, Lorenzo Sani, and Samuel G. Rodriques. BixBench: a Comprehensive Benchmark for LLM-based Agents in Computational Biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00096 ,2025. [44] Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Bo-tao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi 32 Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. ScienceAgentBench: Toward Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for Data-Driven Scientific Discovery. arXiv preprint , 2025. [45] Rauno Arike, Elizabeth Donoway, Henning Bartsch, and Marius Hobbhahn. Technical Report: Evaluating Goal Drift in Language Model Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02709 , 2025. [46] Junhao Zheng, Chengming Shi, Xidi Cai, Qiuke Li, Duzhen Zhang, Chenxing Li, Dong Yu, and Qianli Ma. Lifelong Learning of Large Language Model based Agents: A Roadmap, January 2026. arXiv:2501.07278 [cs]. [47] Ken Gu, Ruoxi Shang, Ruien Jiang, Keying Kuang, Richard-John Lin, Donghe Lyu, Yue Mao, Youran Pan, Teng Wu, Jiaqian Yu, Yikun Zhang, Tianmai M. Zhang, Lanyi Zhu, Mike A. Merrill, Jeffrey Heer, and Tim Althoff. BLADE: Benchmarking Language Model Agents for Data-Driven Science, November 2025. arXiv:2408.09667 [cs]. [48] Muhammad Ahmed Mohsin, Muhammad Umer, Ahsan Bilal, Zeeshan Memon, Muhammad Ibtsaam Qadir, Sagnik Bhattacharya, Hassan Rizwan, Abhiram R. Gorle, Maahe Zehra Kazmi, Nukhba Amir, Ali Subhan, Muham-mad Usman Rafique, Zihao He, Pulkit Mehta, Muhammad Ali Jamshed, and John M. Cioffi. On the Fundamental Limits of LLMs at Scale, 2026. [49] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2023. arXiv:2306.05685. [50] Ilche Georgievski and Marco Aiello. HTN planning: Overview, comparison, and beyond. Artificial Intelligence , 222:124–156, 2015. [51] Xinyi Hou, Yanjie Zhao, Shenao Wang, and Haoyu Wang. Model Con-text Protocol (MCP): Landscape, Security Threats, and Future Research Directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23278 , 2025. [52] LangChain, Inc. LangGraph: Build resilient language agents as graphs. 

https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph , 2024. [53] Aymeric Roucher, Albert Villanova del Moral, Thomas Wolf, Leandro von Werra, and Erik Kaunismäki. ‘smolagents‘: a smol library to build great agentic systems. https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents , 2025. [54] Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. arXiv:2402.01030. 33 [55] Jiawei Gu, Xuhui Jiang, Zhichao Shi, Hexiang Tan, Xuehao Zhai, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Yinghan Shen, Shengjie Ma, Honghao Liu, Yuanzhuo Wang, Jian Guo, et al. A Survey on LLM-as-a-Judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15594 ,2024. [56] Renjun Xu and Yang Yan. Agent Skills for Large Language Models: Ar-chitecture, Acquisition, Security, and the Path Forward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12430 , 2026. 

# 12 Appendix 

## 12.1 Deployed MCP tools on Toolomics 

Below configuration file lists the MCP tools available to agents across all experi-ments. We enabled a core subset for file manipulation (PDF, CSV, text), code execution (Python, shell), and image analysis, while disabling specialized tools (web search, browser automation, molecular structure recognition) to constrain the action space and ensure better reproducibility. Listing 1: The configuration file that list the MCP tools available to agents across all experiments                                                 

> 1[
> 2{
> 3" path ": " mcp_host / mcp_search / server . py " ,
> 4" port ": 5000 ,
> 5" enabled ": false
> 6} ,
> 7{
> 8" path ": " mcp_host / memory / server . py " ,
> 9" port ": 5001 ,
> 10 " enabled ": false
> 11 } ,
> 12 {
> 13 " path ": " mcp_host / pdf / server . py " ,
> 14 " port ": 5002 ,
> 15 " enabled ": true
> 16 } ,
> 17 {
> 18 " path ": " mcp_host / html / server . py " ,
> 19 " port ": 5003 ,
> 20 " enabled ": false
> 21 } ,
> 22 {
> 23 " path ": " mcp_host / graph_rag / server . py " ,
> 24 " port ": 5004 ,
> 25 " enabled ": false
> 26 } ,
> 27 {
> 28 " path ": " mcp_host / browser / server . py " ,
> 29 " port ": 5005 ,
> 30 " enabled ": false

34 31 } , 

32 {

33 " path ": " mcp_host / image_analysis / server . py " , 

34 " port ": 5006 , 

35 " enabled ": true 

36 } , 

37 {

38 " path ": " mcp_host / csv / server . py " , 

39 " port ": 5007 , 

40 " enabled ": true 

41 } , 

42 {

43 " path ": " mcp_host / txt_editor / server . py " , 

44 " port ": 5008 , 

45 " enabled ": true 

46 } , 

47 {

48 " path ": " mcp_host / python_editor / server . py " , 

49 " port ": 5009 , 

50 " enabled ": true 

51 } , 

52 {

53 " path ": " mcp_host / Rscript / docker - compose . yml " , 

54 " port ": 5010 , 

55 " enabled ": false 

56 } , 

57 {

58 " path ": " mcp_host / shell / docker - compose . yml " , 

59 " port ": 5011 , 

60 " enabled ": true 

61 } , 

62 {

63 " path ": 

,→ " mcp_host / browser / searxng / docker - compose . yml " , 

64 " port ": 5012 , 

65 " enabled ": false 

66 } , 

67 {

68 " path ": " mcp_host / decimer / docker - compose . yml " , 

69 " port ": 5013 , 

70 " enabled ": false 

71 }

72 ]

35 12.2 Statistical analysis of Workflow evolution rewards 

Figure 4: Statistical validation of evolution efficacy. (a) Mean gain by cohort with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. All cohorts (2–9) except cohort 10 show significant positive gains (green bars). (b) Probability of improvement (green) versus regression (red) at each transition. Early transitions show improvement rates >50%, while transitions 8 →9 and 9 →10 favor regression. (c) Permutation test distribution vs observed mean gain (red line). The observed gain significantly exceeds the null distribution (p < 0.0001), confirming improvement is not due to random chance. (d) Effect size (Cohen’s d) by cohort. Cohorts 2–9 achieve large effect sizes (d > 0.8), with cohort 4 showing the strongest effect (d = 2.75). All statistical tests are computed on pooled data across models; per-model analyses are deferred to a future revision. 36 12.3 Prompts for Mimosa 

12.3.1 Workflow generation system prompt 

System prompt used with Claude Opus to generate multi-agent workflows, used during evaluation for generation of multi-agent workflow both in one-shot mode and iterative refinement (learning) mode. Listing 2: The system prompt used for the workflow generation 

1 You are a world - class workflow architect specializing in 

,→ creating robust , multi - agent systems using LangGraph 

,→ and a custom ‘ SmolAgent ‘ library . Your primary 

,→ function is to analyze user requests and generate 

,→ complete , executable Python code for a multi - agent 

,→ workflow that solves the given task . 

23 ## 1. Core Principles 

45 ### A . Task Decomposition : The " Divide and Conquer " Mandate 

6 - ** Atomic Agents **: You must break down complex problems 

,→ into the smallest , single - purpose agents . 

7 - ** One Agent , One Job **: Can you describe the agent ’ s 

,→ responsibility in 5 words or less ? 

8 Good : " Fetch web search results " 

9 Bad : " Research topic and generate report " 

10 - ** Functional Boundaries **: Decompose tasks along natural 

,→ functional lines . For example , a task to " research a

,→ topic and create a chart " requires at least two 

,→ agents : one for research and one for charting . 

11 12 ### B . State - Driven , Resilient Routing 

13 - ** Conditional Logic **: All workflow branching must be 

,→ handled by external conditional routing functions 

,→ that inspect the ‘ WorkflowState ‘. Agents themselves 

,→ are blind to the overall workflow . 

14 - ** Bulletproof Error Handling **: Every agent node must 

,→ have a plan for failure . Implement robust retry and 

,→ fallback paths . 

15 - ** Intelligent Retries **: Design routing that can 

,→ backtrack to earlier agents if a downstream failure 

,→ is caused by poor upstream data . For example , if a

,→ ‘ code_executor ‘ agent fails because a ‘ researcher ‘ 

,→ agent provided a bad code snippet , the workflow 

,→ should route back to the ‘ researcher ‘. 

16 17 ### C . Agent Design 

18 - ** Focused Prompts **: Agent instructions must be 

,→ domain - specific , detailing the task , input / output 

,→ format , and mandatory completion keywords . 

19 - ** Completion Keywords **: Agents ** MUST ** signal their 

,→ status by ending their response with a specific 

,→ keyword phrase . This is how your routing functions 

,→ will determine the next step . Use keywords like 

,→ ‘ SUCCESS : ‘ , ‘ FAILURE : ‘ , ‘ RETRY : ‘ , or ‘ FALLBACK : ‘. 

20 21 ## 2. Technical Specification 

22 

37 23 ### Provided Context ( Do NOT redeclare these ) 

24 The following components are pre - loaded in the execution 

,→ environment . You must use them as - is . 

25 26 | Component | Description 

,→

,→ |

27 | - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - |

,→ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

,→ |

28 | ‘ WorkflowState ‘ | The ‘ TypedDict ‘ for graph state . 

,→ You cannot modify its schema . |

29 | ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ | Class to create agent instances . 

,→ ‘ SmolAgentFactory ( name , prompt , tools ) ‘ |

30 | ‘ WorkflowNodeFactory ‘ | Class to create graph nodes . 

,→ ‘ create_agent_node ( agent_instance ) ‘ |

31 | ‘ master_router ‘ | Routing function that based on the 

,→ agent response will either return one of 

,→ ‘[" next_node " , " retry_node " , " fallback_node " , END ] ‘ |

32 | ‘* _TOOLS ‘ | Pre - defined tool packages ( e . g . , 

,→ ‘ BROWSER_MCP ‘ , ‘ FILESYSTEM_MCP ‘ , etc ..) . |

33 34 ### Workflow State Schema 

35 36 ‘‘‘ python 

37 # This is the state object passed between all nodes . It is 

,→ PRE - DEFINED . 

38 class WorkflowState ( TypedDict ) : 

39 step_name : List [ str ] # History of node names 

,→ visited 

40 answers : List [ str ] # History of raw text 

,→ responses from agents 

41 success : List [ bool ] # History of task success 

,→ flags 

42 ‘‘‘ 

43 44 ### Master router 

45 46 47 The master router interprets agent completion signals and 

,→ determines workflow transitions . It enforces a

,→ strict contract between agents and the graph . It is 

,→ already defined . 

48 49 ** Router Signature :** 

50 ‘‘‘ python 

51 def master_router ( state : WorkflowState ) -> 

,→ Literal [" next_node " , " retry_node " , " fallback_node " , 

,→ END ] 

52 ‘‘‘ 

53 54 ** Routing Logic :** 

55 56 | Agent Status | Router Returns | Meaning |

57 | - - - - - - - - - - - - -| - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -| - - - - - - - - -| 

58 | SUCCESS | " next_node " | Task completed , proceed to next 

,→ agent |

38 59 | RETRY | " retry_node " | Recoverable error , re - execute 

,→ current agent |

60 | FALLBACK | " fallback_node " | Missing / bad input , return 

,→ to previous or fallback agent |

61 | FAILURE | END | Unrecoverable error , terminate workflow |

62 | Invalid format | END | Protocol violation , terminate 

,→ with error |

63 64 ** Agent Response Contract :** 

65 Agents MUST end their response by calling final_answer () 

,→ with a JSON string containing : 

66 67 status : One of [" SUCCESS " , " RETRY " , " FALLBACK " , " FAILURE "] 

68 message : Human - readable explanation of the outcome 

69 eg : ‘ final_answer (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) ‘ 

70 71 master_router take care of parsing the agent response . 

72 73 Implementation Note : 

74 The router is pre - defined in your execution environment . 

,→ Reference it in conditional edges : 

75 76 ‘‘‘ python 

77 workflow . add_conditional_edges ( 

78 " researcher " , 

79 master_router , 

80 {

81 " next_node ": " coder " , 

82 " retry_node ": " researcher " , 

83 " fallback_node ": END , # or previous agent 

84 END : END 

85 }

86 )

87 ‘‘‘ 

88 This is for reference only , do not redefine or modify the 

,→ master_router . 

89 90 ### Tools 

91 92 A list of tool package and their given tools will be 

,→ specified , for example : 

93 94 Tool ‘ MCP_5098 ‘ is a collection of tools with the 

,→ following capabilities : [ ’ extract_code_from_html ’ , 

,→ ’ list_html_files ’] 

95 Tool ‘ MCP_WEB_BROWSER ‘ is a collection of tools with the 

,→ following capabilities : [ ’ search ’ , ’ navigate ’] 

96 97 ## 4. How to Build a Workflow 

98 99 Your output must be a single , runnable Python script . 

,→ Follow this structure precisely . 

100 101 ### Step 1: Define Agent Instructions 

102 Create a unique instruction prompt for each agent . The 

,→ prompt must include a ‘ COMPLETION PROTOCOL ‘ section 

39 ,→ that tells the agent which keyword to use for 

,→ success , failure , or other states . 

103 104 ‘‘‘ python 

105 # Good Example : Specific , contextual , with clear 

,→ completion keywords . 

106 instruct_researcher = """ 

107 You are a master web researcher tasked with conducting 

,→ thorough online research to gather accurate , 

,→ credible information on a specific topic . 

108 109 ## GOAL 

110 111 You must conduct research on ... < good search keyword based 

,→ on user goal > 

112 113 ## TASK 

114 - Conduct comprehensive web searches to address the 

,→ research objective 

115 - Prioritize credible sources ( academic papers , government 

,→ reports , reputable news outlets ) over low - quality 

,→ contenty 

116 - Cross - reference multiple sources to ensure accuracy and 

,→ resolve any conflicting information 

117 - Present findings in a clear , structured format with 

,→ proper source attribution 

118 119 ## RECEIVED INFORMATION 

120 121 You will only receive a research goal from the user . 

,→ Likely a research paper title . 

122 123 ## COMPLETION PROTOCOL 

124 - On success , end with : 

125 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

126 127 - On failure , end with : 

128 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

129 """ 

130 ‘‘‘ 

131 132 When signaling FALLBACK , include diagnostic info : 

133 134 final_answer (f ’{{" status ": " FALLBACK " , " message ": " Missing 

,→ required field : publication_date in research 

,→ output "}} ’) 

135 136 This helps the upstream agent correct specific issues on 

,→ retry ." 

137 138 A prompt must specify : 

139 - Its goal 

140 - Received information from previous agent ( if any ) 

141 - Full information needed ( eg : full paper name from user 

,→ query , full link ) 

40 142 - A completion protocol 

143 144 ### Step 2: Create Agents 

145 146 Instantiate each agent using ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ , assigning 

,→ a name , the instruction prompt , and a single tool 

,→ package . 

147 148 ‘‘‘ python 

149 # Agent that uses a pre - defined web tool package . 

150 agent_researcher = SmolAgentFactory (" researcher " , 

,→ instruct_researcher , BROWSER_MCP ) 

151 152 # Agent that writes and executes R code and has shell . 

153 agent_coder = SmolAgentFactory (" coder " , instruct_coder , 

,→ R_SCRIPT_MCP + SHELL_MCP ) 

154 ‘‘‘ 

155 156 Agent should always be provided with a tool package , If no 

,→ Tool package seem to fit the task consider using a

,→ bash tool mcp . 

157 158 These MCP Tools are just example and might not exist , list 

,→ of available tools will be provided . 

159 160 ### Step 4: Assemble the Graph 

161 Put everything together into a ‘ StateGraph ‘. 

162 Do not compile the workflow , it is already in the context . 

163 Be sure to name the StateGraph ‘ workflow ‘. 

164 165 ‘‘‘ python 

166 167 # --- WORKFLOW SCRIPT ---

168 169 # 1. MANDATORY Workflow Initialization 

170 workflow = StateGraph ( WorkflowState ) # WorkflowState is 

,→ not a string , it is a defined variable in the 

,→ context , you should use WorkflowState as a variable 

,→ passed as argument to the StateGraph 

171 172 # 2. AGENT INSTRUCTIONS ( Define all prompts here ) 

173 instruct_researcher = """ 

174 You are a web research specialist focused on gathering 

,→ comprehensive , credible information on any given 

,→ topic . 

175 176 ## GOAL 

177 178 You must search for the latest news on the use of entropy 

,→ in AI research . 

179 180 ## INSTRUCTION 

181 You must find comprehensive information on < research 

,→ goal >... 

182 183 ## RECEIVED INFORMATION 

41 184 You will receive a research topic or question from the 

,→ user that needs investigation . 

185 186 ## COMPLETION PROTOCOL 

187 - On success , end with : 

188 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

189 190 - On failure , end with : 

191 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

192 193 - On impossible task , end with : 

194 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " RETRY " , " message ": "..."} ’) 

195 """ 

196 197 instruct_coder = """ 

198 You are a Python coding specialist responsible for 

,→ writing , executing , and debugging code based on 

,→ research data . 

199 200 ## INSTRUCTION 

201 You must implement a code for < user goal >... 

202 203 ## RECEIVED INFORMATION 

204 You will receive research findings or data from previous 

,→ agents that you need to process or analyze through 

,→ code . 

205 206 ## COMPLETION PROTOCOL 

207 208 - On success , end with : 

209 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " SUCCESS " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

210 211 - On coding failure , end with : 

212 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " RETRY " , " message ": "..."} ’) 

213 214 - On missing data , end with : 

215 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " FALLBACK " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

216 217 - On impossible task , end with : 

218 final_answer (f ’{" status ": " FAILURE " , " message ": 

,→ "..."} ’) 

219 """ 

220 221 # 3. AGENT CREATION ( Instantiate all agents here ) 

222 agent_researcher = SmolAgentFactory (" researcher " , 

,→ instruct_researcher , WEB_SEARCH_MCP + SHELL_MCP ) 

223 agent_coder = SmolAgentFactory (" coder " , instruct_coder , 

,→ PYTHON_EDITING_MCP + SHELL_MCP ) 

224 225 # 4. NODE DEFINITION ( Add agents to the workflow here ) 

226 workflow . add_node (" researcher " , 

,→ WorkflowNodeFactory . create_agent_node ( agent_researcher ) ) 

42 227 workflow . add_node (" coder " , 

,→ WorkflowNodeFactory . create_agent_node ( agent_coder ) ) 

228 229 # 5. EDGE DEFINITION ( Wire the graph together here ) 

230 workflow . add_edge ( START , " researcher ") 

231 232 # master_router is a method that can return one of 

,→ [" next_node " , " retry_node " , " fallback_node " , END ] 

233 workflow . add_conditional_edges ( 

234 " researcher " , 

235 master_router , # always trust the master_router 

236 {

237 " next_node ": " coder " , 

238 " retry_node ": " researcher " , 

239 " fallback_node ": " knowledge_agent " , 

240 END : END 

241 }

242 )

243 244 workflow . add_conditional_edges ( 

245 " coder " , 

246 master_router , # always trust the master_router 

247 {

248 " next_node ": " < next agen " or END > , 

249 " retry_node ": " coder " , 

250 " fallback_node ": END , 

251 END : END 

252 }

253 )

254 # --- END OF SCRIPT ---

255 ‘‘‘ 

256 257 ## 5. Final Checklist 

258 259 - [ ] ** Output Format **: Your entire response is a single 

,→ Python script wrapped in ‘‘‘ python ... ‘ ‘ ‘. 

260 - [ ] ** Final Response Format **: ensure that the final 

,→ response from the last agent strictly respects the 

,→ format requested by the user 

261 - [ ] ** No Imports **: Do not import or redefine the 

,→ provided context components ( ‘ SmolAgentFactory ‘ , 

,→ etc .) . 

262 - [ ] ** Guaranteed Exit **: Does the workflow have a clear 

,→ start and a guaranteed path to ‘END ‘? 

263 - [ ] ** Smart fallback **: Avoid using fallback node on the 

,→ previous agent , fallback to more early agent to 

,→ avoid infinite loop , you may use a judge agent to 

,→ decide on routing . 

264 - [ ] ** Validation + Cleaning **: A last agent should be a

,→ strict judge designed for minimal syconanphancy that 

,→ ensure outputs of previous agents respect 

,→ high - standard . It must also arange files and clean 

,→ temporary one . 

265 - [ ] ** No overkill prompt **: Prompt for agent should stay 

,→ short and should not contain code example . 

266 

43 267 The workflow can be composed of various conditional flows , 

,→ enabling loops , branching , or complex custom logic 

,→ depending on the user goals . To achieve robust and 

,→ adaptive behaviors , it is recommended to apply 

,→ established multi - agent system best practices . These 

,→ include using specialized agents such as an 

,→ LLM - as -a - Judge for arbitration and evaluation , 

,→ introducing conditional agent loops to refine 

,→ outputs iteratively , and leveraging consensus 

,→ mechanisms between agents to improve reasoning 

,→ quality . 

268 269 ## 6. Rules 

270 271 1. All agent should be given a shell tool in addition to 

,→ their primary tool . 

272 2. All survey / document analysis agent should have a tool 

,→ to take note ( such as text editing tool ) , in 

,→ addition to their shell and document extraction 

,→ tools . 

273 3. Document extraction such as PDF should ALWAYS use 

,→ multiple - agents including judge agent should 

,→ decompose the task and refine until quality is 

,→ deemed sufficient . 

12.3.2 Workflow improvement prompt 

Located in sources/core/dgm.py:150:212 .Listing 3: The prompt used for the workflow improvement 

1 def improvement_prompt ( self , goal : str , wf_info : 

,→ WorkflowInfo , flow_code : str , run_stderr : str , 

,→ iteration_count : int ) -> str : 

2 exec_result = "" 

3 wf_state = wf_info . state_result if wf_info else None 

4 judge_eval = wf_info . judge_evaluation if wf_info else 

,→ None 

56 if judge_eval : # use judge evalu if possible 

7 exec_result = judge_eval 

8 elif wf_state : # alternative : use agents answer dict 

9 exec_result = self . get_flow_answers ( wf_state ) 

10 self . show_answers ( exec_result ) 

11 else : # use stdout / stderr if execution failed 

12 exec_result = run_stderr . strip () 

13 14 improv_prompt = " Previous attempt failed . Learn from 

,→ mistakes and improve the multi - agent workflow ." 

15 if flow_code is not None : 

16 improv_prompt = "\ n ". join ([ 

17 "## SELF - IMPROVEMENT STEP " , 

18 " Your previous attempt at generating a

,→ workflow did not succeed or didn ’ t reach 

,→ success threshold ." , 

19 " Your goal was : " , 

20 goal , 

44 21 "\ n " , 

22 "## Previous workflow code :" , 

23 " < python >" , 

24 flow_code , 

25 " </ python >" , 

26 "\ n " , 

27 "## EXECUTION RESULTS ::" , 

28 " This is the answer from each agent during the 

,→ last execution ." , 

29 " < results >" , 

30 exec_result , 

31 " </ results >" , 

32 " Reflect on your previous attempt and identify 

,→ what went wrong ." , 

33 "\ n " , 

34 "## ANALYZE FAILURES :" , 

35 "1. If the workflow code execution failed , 

,→ analyze the error and fix the python 

,→ code . If no workflow was generated , this 

,→ is most likely because prompt were too 

,→ long , invalid syntax or ‘‘‘ 

,→ delimitation missing ( ‘ ‘ ‘ python ... ‘ ‘ ‘) " , 

36 "2. If an agent failed due to tool 

,→ limitations , consider an alternative 

,→ tool ." , 

37 "3. If an agent failed due to lack of 

,→ information , add a research step ." , 

38 "4. If agent didn ’ t behave as expected , refine 

,→ the prompt or agent role ." , 

39 "5. Consider adding error handling or 

,→ validation steps ." , 

40 "\ n " , 

41 "## GENERATE ONE IMPROVEMENT :" , 

42 " Select the SINGLE most impactful change from 

,→ above ." , 

43 " Apply ONLY that one change to the code ." , 

44 " Explain what will improve and why ." , 

45 "\ n " , 

46 " Your improvement will be empirically 

,→ validated against the baseline ." , 

47 ]) 

48 49 return "". join ( 

50 [

51 f " Attempt { iteration_count + 1} of workflow 

,→ generation .\ n " , 

52 improv_prompt , 

53 " Target goal :\ n " , 

54 goal , 

55 ]

56 )

12.3.3 LLM-as-a-judge prompt for workflow scoring 

Located in sources/evaluation/evaluator.py:287-340 .45 Listing 4: The prompt used for the LLM-as-a-Judge scoring workflow 

1 prompt = f """ 

2 { execution_text } 

34 EVALUATION TASK : 

5 Based on the complete execution state and workflow code 

,→ above , 

6 provide a score for each category . 

7 Give your score as a float on a scale of 0.0 to 1.0 , where 

,→ 0.0 means is a total failure , and 1.0 means a

,→ perfect execution . 

8 Analyse the full JSON state and workflow implementation to 

,→ make your judgement . 

9 Please be objective , technical , and specific in your 

,→ feedback . 

10 11 CRITERIA : 

12 1. GOAL ALIGNMENT 

13 Did the execution achieve the defined objective ? 

14 Were all required steps completed ? 

15 Were there unexpected deviations ? 

16 17 2. AGENT COLLABORATION 

18 Did agents pass data correctly ? 

19 Did agents handle failures gracefully ? 

20 21 3. OUTPUT QUALITY 

22 Is the output complete ? 

23 Is the output well - formatted ? 

24 25 """ + ( f """4. ANSWER CORRECTNESS 

26 Answer should be : { answer } 

27 Is the answer factually correct ? 

28 Is the answer logically consistent ? 

29 Is the answer precise ? 

30 """ if answer else "") + """ 

31 32 Respond in this exact format : 

33 [

34 {

35 " category ": " goal_alignment " , 

36 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] , 

37 " evidence ": "[ Specific JSON paths / logs proving 

,→ objective fulfillment ]" 

38 } , 

39 {

40 " category ": " agent_collaboration " , 

41 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] , 

42 " evidence ": "[ Message history snippets or error 

,→ logs ]" 

43 } , 

44 {

45 " category ": " output_quality " , 

46 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] , 

47 " evidence ": "[ Output validation errors or missing 

,→ fields ]" 

48 }""" + (""" 

46 49 ,{ 

50 " category ": " answer_correctness " , 

51 " score ": [0.0 -1.0] , 

52 " evidence ": "[ Factual accuracy verification ]" 

53 }""" if answer else "") + """ 

54 ]

55 """ 

12.3.4 GPT-4o struggle in single agent mode 

GPT-4o consistently struggled to adhere to the code schema required by the HuggingFace framework, repeatedly failing to generate properly formatted code blocks. Often tried to terminate execution, yet failed to invoke the final answer tool. Explaining its low success rate in single-agent mode. Listing 5: Logs of GPT-4o consistently struggled to adhere to the code schema required by the Hugging Face framework 

1 - Executing parsed code : 

2 # Recommend focused platform environment review or 

,→ support function for addressing dataset access 

3 print (" Please engage with platform support to undergo a

,→ targeted review of access permits or tool 

,→ specifics relative to dataset 

4 handling .") 

56 Execution logs : 

7 Please engage with platform support to undergo a targeted 

,→ review of access permits or tool specifics relative 

,→ to dataset handling . 

89 Out : None 

10 [ Step 183: Duration 3.94 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,353 ,139 

,→ | Output tokens : 16 ,486] 

11 12 Error in code parsing : 

13 Your code snippet is invalid , because the regex pattern 

,→ was not found in it . 

14 Here is your code snippet : 

15 Engaging with platform support to undergo a targeted 

,→ review of access permissions or tool specifics in 

,→ relation to dataset handling is 

16 essential . This process will help identify and resolve any 

,→ underlying constraints that are impacting dataset 

,→ accessibility . If further 

17 guidance or assistance is needed , feel free to reach out ! 

18 Make sure to include code with the correct pattern , for 

,→ instance : 

19 Thoughts : Your thoughts 

20 Code : 

21 # Your python code here 

22 < end_code > 

23 Make sure to provide correct code blobs . 

24 [ Step 184: Duration 3.18 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,403 ,309 

,→ | Output tokens : 16 ,540] 

25 

47 26 - Executing parsed code : 

27 # Final recommendation for resolution involves engaging 

,→ platform support 

28 print (" To resolve dataset access challenges , consult 

,→ platform support for a comprehensive review and 

,→ necessary adjustments in 

29 configuration settings .") 

30 31 Execution logs : 

32 To resolve dataset access challenges , consult platform 

,→ support for a comprehensive review and necessary 

,→ adjustments in configuration 

33 settings . 

34 35 Out : None 

36 [ Step 185: Duration 3.29 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,453 ,708 

,→ | Output tokens : 16 ,617] 

37 38 Error in code parsing : 

39 Your code snippet is invalid , because the regex pattern 

,→ was not found in it . 

40 [ Step 186: Duration 2.85 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,504 ,290 

,→ | Output tokens : 16 ,669] 

41 42 - Executing parsed code : 

43 # Suggest alternative engagement or confirmation on 

,→ persistent data accessibility 

44 print (" Pursue alternate methodology or request platform 

,→ support clarification regarding data access 

,→ execution alignment .") 

45 46 Execution logs : 

47 Pursue alternate methodology or request platform support 

,→ clarification regarding data access execution 

,→ alignment . 

48 49 Out : None 

50 [ Step 187: Duration 3.27 seconds | Input tokens : 5 ,555 ,097 

,→ | Output tokens : 16 ,759] 

51 52 - Executing parsed code : 

53 # Advise exploring solution - oriented pathways with 

,→ platform coordination 

54 print (" Engage platform support for operational guidance 

,→ or reassessment of compliance with dataset 

,→ integration possibilities .") 

48