Title: Semantics-Guided Automatic Tensorization for Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms: A Multi-Agent Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.02387v1

Published Time: Thu, 03 Sep 2026 00:53:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Semantics-Guided Automatic Tensorization for Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms: A Multi-Agent Framework 

Zhenyu Liang, Beichen Huang, Bowen Zheng, and Ran Cheng 

Abstract —Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) naturally expose population-level parallelism, but many mature implementations encode their computation in sequential program structures designed for central processing units. Exploiting mod-ern tensor computing platforms therefore requires more than direct code translation: the implementation must be restructured without changing the defining optimization mechanism of the underlying MOEA. We formulate automatic tensorization for MOEAs as semantics-guided computational restructuring and develop Evolutionary Code Conversion (EvoCoCo) 1, a multi-agent framework that realizes this formulation. EvoCoCo re-constructs algorithm-specific states, dependencies, operators, and update logic into a structured semantic representation and organizes them through a shared tensorization blueprint. Spe-cialized transformation branches then explore alternative tensor realizations, while execution feedback guides validation, repair, and candidate selection. Experiments on a benchmark of 48 MOEAs evaluate migration reliability, optimization fidelity, and computational scalability. Under matched large language model backends, EvoCoCo attains higher migration reliability than direct one-shot translation. Across the benchmark suites, 88.2% of valid comparisons satisfy the predefined optimization-fidelity criterion. The tensorized implementations also exhibit increasing acceleration on graphics processing units as population size or decision dimension grows, with median measured speedups ranging from 22 .6× under population scaling to 80 .2× under decision-dimension scaling. External-source and ablation studies further assess transfer beyond the main benchmark and the roles of the major framework components. 

Index Terms —Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms, auto-matic tensorization, multi-agent framework, graphics processing unit acceleration. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# MULTIOBJECTIVE evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) approximate Pareto-optimal trade-offs in problems with multiple conflicting objectives [1]–[4]. Such problems arise in engineering design, resource scheduling, path planning, energy systems, industrial control, machine learning, and scientific computing. Their computational burden can be dominated by expensive function evaluations [5] and can also grow with 

Zhenyu Liang, Beichen Huang, and Bowen Zheng are with the De-partment of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mails: {zhenyuliang97, bill.huang2001 }@gmail.com and bowen.zheng@protonmail.com. Ran Cheng is with the Department of Data Science and Artificial Intelli-gence, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China; the Hong Kong Polytechnic University Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, Guangdong, China; and the Hong Kong Poly-technic University-Daya Bay Technology and Innovation Research Institute, Huizhou 516083, Guangdong, China. (E-mail: ranchengcn@gmail.com) 

> 1

Source code: https://github.com/EMI-Group/evococo. 

high-dimensional problem scale [6]. These costs limit the practical scale at which MOEAs can be applied. The population-based structure of MOEAs also exposes substantial computational parallelism. Objective evaluation, variation, ranking, environmental selection, and archive op-erations repeatedly process candidate solutions or population-level relations that can often be evaluated concurrently. Mod-ern graphics processing units (GPUs) can exploit this reg-ularity through batched tensor operations [7]. Consequently, tensorization provides a natural route to scalable MOEA computation when the underlying algorithmic structure can be expressed in a tensor-compatible form. However, mature MOEA implementations often fail to expose this algorithmic parallelism in a GPU-compatible form. Many implementations combine vectorized operations with individual-level loops, dynamic containers, conditional branches, and framework-specific state management designed for central processing units (CPUs). The parallelism belongs to the algorithmic structure, whereas the computational bot-tleneck often lies in its program realization. GPU execution therefore requires the data representation, control structure, and state updates to be reorganized into tensor computation while the defining mechanism of the underlying MOEA re-mains intact. Recent work has established GPU-accelerated infrastruc-ture for evolutionary computation [8], general tensorization principles for MOEA implementations [9], and tensorized realizations of specific algorithms such as RVEA [10] and NSGA-III [11]. Tensorized GPU computation has also been investigated in constrained multiobjective optimization [12]. Taken together, these studies demonstrate that computational restructuring can expose substantial GPU parallelism, but existing approaches rely largely on manual or algorithm-specific redesign and therefore do not resolve the automation problem. An automatic method must instead operate across mature implementations with heterogeneous states, operators, auxiliary functions, update schedules, and coding conventions. Moreover, the same algorithmic mechanism can admit dif-ferent tensor realizations, while similar source structures can encode different algorithmic roles. Consequently, automatic tensorization requires a representation that separates what must be preserved from how the target computation may be restructured. Closing this automation gap requires several distinct rea-soning functions: reconstructing source algorithmic semantics, planning target computation, exploring alternative tensor real-arXiv:2609.02387v1 [cs.NE] 2 Sep 2026 2

izations, diagnosing runtime failures, and assessing executable candidates. Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated code-generation capabilities [13] and program-translation ca-pabilities [14]. Execution-aware systems further show the value of repository interaction and test execution [15], as well as execution and performance signals for iterative GPU-program refinement [16]. However, automatic tensorization requires these heterogeneous functions to remain coordinated under a common interpretation of the source MOEA. This requirement motivates a computational architecture in which specialized reasoning roles exchange structured intermediate representations under shared semantic constraints. To address these requirements, we formulate automatic tensorization for MOEAs as semantics-guided computational restructuring and develop Evolutionary Code Conversion (EvoCoCo) , a multi-agent framework that realizes this for-mulation. EvoCoCo reconstructs source algorithmic semantics, organizes them into a shared tensorization blueprint, explores alternative tensor realizations, and closes the transformation loop through execution-guided refinement and selection. Its agent organization mirrors this functional decomposition and coordinates specialized roles through shared intermediate rep-resentations. The framework also exhibits an evolution-like search structure in which alternative computational realizations are generated under shared semantic constraints, evaluated in the target environment, refined when necessary, and selected according to target-side evidence. We instantiate and evaluate EvoCoCo by transforming heterogeneous PlatEMO implemen-tations into tensorized EvoX/PyTorch implementations. The main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

We formulate automatic tensorization for MOEAs as semantics-guided computational restructuring. For a con-crete MOEA, the formulation treats its software imple-mentation as the transformation object and the underlying optimization mechanism as the semantic constraint.  

> •

We develop EvoCoCo, a multi-agent framework whose specialized roles mirror the functional decomposition of automatic tensorization. Shared intermediate representa-tions coordinate semantic analysis, contextual rule re-trieval, transformation planning, diversified restructuring, repair, and selection.  

> •

We introduce a shared tensorization blueprint, alternative computational restructuring strategies, and closed-loop execution feedback. The blueprint links reconstructed algorithmic semantics to target tensor computation, while the restructuring branches explore different realizations under the same semantic constraints.  

> •

We construct a benchmark comprising 48 MOEAs and evaluate the generated tensorized implementations in terms of migration reliability, optimization fidelity, com-putational scalability, transfer to external implementa-tions, and component contributions. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. MOEAs and Software Implementations 

MOEA diversity induces corresponding diversity in com-putational structure. NSGA-II combines nondominated sorting with crowding-based density estimation [2], whereas SPEA2 uses strength-based fitness assignment together with density estimation [17]. MOEA/D organizes search around weighted subproblems and scalarizing functions [3]; NSGA-III uses ref-erence points to guide association and niching [18]; and RVEA uses reference vectors to guide environmental selection [19]. Indicator-based methods such as HypE introduce contribution estimation during environmental selection [20]. Constrained extensions introduce additional constraint-handling mecha-nisms [21], while multimodal methods may coevolve multiple populations [22]. Particle-swarm methods add velocity-based population updates [23]; large-scale methods use problem transformation [24] or reformulation [25] to manage high-dimensional decision spaces; and sparse optimization intro-duces sparsity-oriented decision-variable structures [26]. Con-sequently, automatic tensorization must accommodate hetero-geneous state lifetimes, data dependencies, update schedules, and control structures rather than apply a fixed operator template. Software platforms make this structural heterogeneity explicit through concrete implementations. jMetal [27], DEAP [28], pagmo/PyGMO [29], pymoo [30], and PlatEMO [31] provide reusable implementations and common experimental infrastructure. PlatEMO is particularly suitable for studying automatic tensorization because it contains a broad range of established MOEAs under unified interfaces. Nevertheless, its MATLAB implementations differ in population abstractions, auxiliary functions, dynamic variables, set operations, loops, branches, and persistent states. These implementation-level differences define the structural heterogeneity that the transformation process must resolve. 

B. Tensorization for Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms 

Tensorization reformulates the data and operations of MOEA implementations for batched tensor computation [9]. Pairwise relations can be expressed through broadcasting, conditional selection through Boolean masks, decomposition metrics through batched scalarization, and subset manipulation through tensor indexing. These formulations reduce individual-level host-side processing and expose population-level compu-tation more directly to GPU execution. Existing studies establish the feasibility of tensor-based GPU acceleration for evolutionary computation and selected MOEAs. EvoX provides GPU-accelerated infrastructure for evolutionary computation [8]. TensorRVEA reformulates the data structures and environmental selection of RVEA for tensor execution [10], while EvoMO develops tensorization principles for data structures, basic operations, and control flow and applies them to several representative algorithms [9]. TensorNSGA-III develops a tensorized realization of NSGA-III [11], and tensorized computation has also been extended to constrained multiobjective optimization [12]. However, these lines of work rely largely on manually designed tensorization or algorithm-specific GPU implementations. The present work therefore focuses on deriving tensorized implementations au-tomatically from heterogeneous source programs. 3

C. LLM-Based Program Transformation 

LLM-based program transformation demonstrates that learned models can map source programs across software representations. Codex demonstrates general code synthesis capabilities [13], while TransCoder studies unsupervised trans-lation among programming languages [14]. CodeXGLUE pro-vides benchmark tasks for code understanding and generation, including program translation [32], while CodeNet provides a large-scale code dataset for diverse coding tasks [33]. Later studies investigate automatic library migration [34] and large-scale code migration in industrial settings [35]. However, these approaches do not determine which computational structures must remain invariant and which may be reorganized during tensorization. Execution feedback complements static program transfor-mation by exposing target-side constraints that cannot be determined reliably before execution. CodeRL uses unit-test feedback to guide code generation [36], SWE-agent combines repository interaction with test execution [15], and Kernel-Bench evaluates and refines GPU programs using execution and performance signals [16]. Automatic MOEA tensorization requires this feedback-oriented view, but it also introduces algorithm-specific states, population-level restructuring, and stochastic optimization outcomes. Consequently, the transfor-mation must reconstruct source algorithmic semantics before generation and validate the resulting implementation in the target optimization environment. 

D. Evaluation of Generated MOEA Implementations 

Generated programs are commonly assessed through exe-cutability, functional correctness, and computational efficiency. HumanEval [13] and EvalPlus [37] use test-based evaluation to assess functional correctness, while KernelBench combines correctness with runtime performance for generated GPU ker-nels [16]. Such protocols are appropriate when deterministic outputs or reference computations are available. MOEA implementations require an additional evaluation layer because stochastic optimization outcomes cannot gen-erally be validated through exact output matching. MOEA studies therefore use repeated runs on established benchmark suites, including DTLZ [38], WFG [39], LSMOP [40], and MaF [41], together with indicators such as inverted genera-tional distance (IGD) [42] and hypervolume [43]. Automati-cally tensorized implementations must therefore answer three separate questions: whether the transformed program executes, whether its optimization outcomes remain comparable under matched settings, and whether the restructuring yields com-putational benefit. Accordingly, our evaluation treats these questions separately rather than using any single criterion as a proxy for transformation quality. III. S EMANTICS -G UIDED AUTOMATIC TENSORIZATION 

A. Problem Formulation 

Automatic tensorization for MOEAs operates on concrete algorithm implementations rather than abstract algorithms. Let 

CS denote a source implementation of an MOEA, and let CT

denote a tensorized target implementation derived from CS .The program CS is the transformation object, whereas the source MOEA denotes the underlying optimization mechanism encoded by that program. Consequently, CT may differ from 

CS in data representation, control flow, framework interfaces, and execution model, provided that it retains the principal operators, persistent states, dependencies, and update logic of the source MOEA. In this work, the algorithmic semantics of a source MOEA implementation refers to the principal operators, persistent states, dependencies, and update relations that characterize its optimization mechanism. This term does not imply formal program equivalence or identical stochastic trajectories. Formally, automatic tensorization maps a source implemen-tation to a target implementation as 

CT = T (CS ), CT ∈ P T , (1) where PT denotes the space of programs admitted by the target tensor-computing environment. A feasible target im-plementation must satisfy the constraints gj (CT ; CS ) = 0 ,

j = 1, . . . , J , where gj = 0 denotes satisfaction of the 

jth transformation constraint. These constraints cover program integrity, target-environment compatibility, runtime executabil-ity, numerical validity, and retention of the principal algorith-mic mechanism. The feasible target space is therefore 

F(CS ) = CT ∈ P T gj (CT ; CS ) = 0 , j = 1 , . . . , J . (2) Algorithmic retention and optimization fidelity constrain different aspects of the transformation. Algorithmic retention requires the target implementation to preserve the principal operators, persistent states, dependencies, and update sequence encoded by the source program. It does not require identi-cal random trajectories or element-wise agreement between 

CS and CT . Optimization outcomes are assessed separately through repeated benchmark runs under matched problem settings. This separation prevents stochastic performance sim-ilarity from serving as a substitute for implementation com-pleteness and avoids imposing trajectory-level equivalence. Beyond feasibility, tensorization introduces a target-side restructuring objective. Among feasible implementations, the transformation should replace avoidable individual-level or host-side population computation with batched tensor oper-ations while remaining compatible with the target execution model. Consequently, automatic tensorization is not direct code translation. It is a constrained restructuring problem in which reconstructed algorithmic semantics constrain how the computational realization may change. The notation above deliberately abstracts from specific software frameworks; the EvoCoCo realization evaluated in this paper instanti-ates the source and target environments with PlatEMO and EvoX/PyTorch, respectively, as described below. 

B. Methodological Overview 

Semantics-guided tensorization separates source invariants from target-side design choices. As illustrated in Fig. 1, auto-matic tensorization proceeds through four logical functions: semantic reconstruction, blueprint construction, diversified 4Semantics-Guided Automatic Tensorization       

> Semantic
> reconstruction Tensorization
> blueprint Diversified
> restructuring Execution-guided
> refinement & selection
> 1234Source code

Source MOEA
implementation    

> • States & lifetimes
> • Dependencies
> • Operators & update logic
> • Target states & shapes
> • Tensor formulations
> • Framework constraints
> • Tensorization alternatives
> • Shared semantic blueprint
> • Validate → diagnose → refine
> • Optimization-aware selection
> Execution feedback
> Tensorization Agents Repair + Selection
> realizes
> Blueprint Agent EvoCoCo
> Multi-agent realization Source Analysis + Rule Retrieval
> Fig. 1. Methodological overview of semantics-guided automatic tensorization for MOEAs. A source MOEA implementation is reconstructed into a structured semantic representation and a shared tensorization blueprint. Multiple branches then explore alternative computational realizations under common semantic constraints. Execution feedback supports refinement and optimization-aware selection of the final tensorized implementation.

computational restructuring, and execution-guided refinement and selection. This decomposition defines the functional re-quirements of the transformation independently of any partic-ular agent organization. The multi-agent framework introduced below provides the computational architecture that coordinates these functions. Structured intermediate representations make this separation explicit through the information flow 

CS → S → R S → B → { Ck}Kk=1 → Z → C⋆T , (3) where S is the structured semantic representation recon-structed from the source implementation, RS is the task-relevant subset retrieved from the rule base R, and B is the tensorization blueprint. Each restructuring strategy sk ∈ S 

produces a candidate implementation Ck under the same S,

RS , and B. Candidates are then executed and, when necessary, refined using diagnostic feedback. The validated candidate set 

Z is hierarchically assessed to obtain the selected tensorized implementation C⋆T .The decomposition also determines where alternative design choices are permitted. The semantic representation S records what the source implementation does, while the blueprint B

specifies how those requirements may be realized in the target framework. Candidate branches can therefore explore differ-ent tensor formulations without independently reinterpreting the source MOEA. Execution feedback then resolves target-side constraints that cannot be determined reliably before a candidate is run. 

C. EvoCoCo: Multi-Agent Framework 

In the implementation evaluated in this work, EvoCoCo transforms PlatEMO source programs into EvoX/PyTorch targets. EvoCoCo operationalizes each methodological func-tion through a specialized agent role. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the Source Analysis Agent reconstructs S, the rule-retrieval role supplies contextual transformation knowledge, and the Blueprint Agent constructs B. Multiple Tensorization Agents instantiate alternative restructuring hypotheses under this shared blueprint. Execution failures provide diagnostic feedback to the Repair Agent, and the Selection Agent assesses validated candidates to obtain the final tensorized implemen-tation. Role specialization prevents each restructuring branch from solving the full transformation problem independently. Se-mantic interpretation is separated from target-code genera-tion, planning establishes constraints shared by all branches, and execution diagnosis is deferred until target-side evidence becomes available. Shared intermediate representations coor-dinate these roles. Consequently, the framework can com-bine heterogeneous reasoning functions without requiring each branch to reinterpret the source program. Algorithm 1 makes this principle-to-architecture mapping explicit. Shared semantic constraints precede diversified re-structuring, and execution-guided refinement closes the trans-formation loop. 

D. Semantic Reconstruction and Tensorization Blueprint 

Semantic reconstruction establishes the source-level con-straints required before target code can be generated. Source syntax does not explicitly identify which variables constitute persistent algorithmic state, which update relations define the optimization mechanism, or which loops express population-level computation. Consequently, direct line-by-line translation cannot provide the required source-level account. EvoCoCo therefore reconstructs a structured semantic representation S,retrieves the rules relevant to that representation, and con-structs the shared tensorization blueprint B.

1) Source Semantic Reconstruction: The Source Analysis Agent reconstructs the structured semantic representation S

from CS without generating target code. The representa-tion identifies the algorithm category, principal optimization mechanisms, execution workflow, external dependencies, and auxiliary functions. It records initialization, mating selec-tion, variation, objective evaluation, environmental selection, archive maintenance, state updates, and termination when these components are present in the source implementation. The representation separates persistent algorithmic states from temporary values. For each state, it records the semantic role, source-side dimensions, lifetime, and dependencies. Per-sistent states may include populations, objective values, ideal points, reference vectors, neighborhoods, archives, velocity 51 Understanding  

> Analyze → rules → plan
> Knowledge Sources
> Input code
> Scan & bug rules
> Source knowledge
> Target references
> Analysis Agent
> Parse · trace · inspect
> → Analysis report
> Rule Retrieval
> Retrieve · filter · rank
> → Selected rules
> Blueprint Agent
> Map · tensorize · plan
> → Blueprint
> Agent 1
> Draft code
> Agent 2
> Draft code
> Agent k
> Draft code
> mask-based
> Candidate
> broadcasting
> Candidate

⋯ indexing  

> Candidate
> 2

Tensorization  

> Parallel agent generation
> Validation Loop
> F
> Validation Repair
> P
> Valid Candidates

···  

> Selection Agent Final Code Candidate Pool

···  

> Cand. 2 Cand. p

Validation
& Selection     

> Repair → evaluate → select
> Cand. 1
> 3
> Fidelity Efficiency Tensor
> degree Cand. 1 Cand. 2 Cand. q

Fig. 2. Multi-agent architecture of EvoCoCo. Specialized agents assume distinct transformation responsibilities while sharing source analysis, retrieved rules, and the tensorization blueprint. Parallel Tensorization Agents explore alternative computational realizations. Execution feedback then drives repair, and the Selection Agent assesses the validated candidates. 

Algorithm 1 EvoCoCo Multi-Agent Realization of Semantics-Guided Automatic Tensorization 

Require: Source MOEA implementation CS , rule base R,restructuring strategies S = {s1, . . . , s K }, maximum refinement iterations I

Ensure: Tensorized target implementation C⋆T or F AIL 1: /* Semantic Reconstruction and Blueprint Construction */ 

2: S ← ANALYZE SOURCE (CS )

3: RS ← RETRIEVE RULES (S, R)

4: B ← BUILD BLUEPRINT (CS , S, RS )

5: /* Diversified Computational Restructuring */ 

6: for k = 1 to K in parallel do 

7: Ck ← TRANSFORM (CS , B, RS , s k)

8: end for 

9: /* Execution-Guided Refinement and Selection */ 

10: for k = 1 to K in parallel do 

11: i ← 0

12: (rk, e k, H k, T k) ← VALIDATE (Ck, B )

13: while rk = FAIL and i < I do 

14: Ck ← REPAIR (Ck, e k, C S , RS )

15: i ← i + 1 

16: (rk, e k, H k, T k) ← VALIDATE (Ck, B )

17: end while 

18: if rk = PASS then 

19: Qk ← ASSESS TENSORIZATION (Ck, B )

20: zk ← (Ck, H k, T k, Q k)

21: else 

22: zk ← INVALID 23: end if 

24: end for 

25: Z ← { zk | zk̸ = INVALID , k = 1 , . . . , K }

26: if Z = ∅ then 

27: return FAIL 28: end if 

29: C⋆T ← HIERARCHICAL SELECT (Z)

30: return C⋆T

states, and generation-dependent parameters. The analysis also records quantities such as population size N , number of objectives M , decision dimension D, and iteration budget G.Target tensor shapes and concrete implementation choices are deferred to the blueprint, which keeps source interpretation separate from target realization. The analysis also identifies computational structures that constrain tensorization. Typical structures include individual-level loops, pairwise comparisons, dynamic lists, iterative front extraction, conditional population updates, and repeated subset operations. It separates population-level computations that admit reformulation through broadcasting, masking, batched indexing, or tensor sorting from procedures that contain genuine sequential dependencies. Source-specific conventions such as one-based indexing, MATLAB dimension semantics, implicit broadcasting, population-object slicing, persistent-state accumulation, modified dominance relations, nonstandard normalization, and custom tie-breaking are recorded explicitly because they can affect the identity of the implemented MOEA. 

2) Context-Aware Rule Retrieval: Context-aware rule re-trieval supplements reconstructed algorithmic semantics with target-framework knowledge. The rule base R contains target-framework requirements, recurring migration risks, and val-idated tensorization practices. The Rule Retriever selects a compact subset RS according to the mechanisms and trans-formation risks recorded in S. Universal rules cover EvoX in-terfaces, state management, device and data-type consistency, MATLAB-to-PyTorch dimension conversion, numerical safe-guards, unsupported operations, and unintended host-device synchronization. Contextual rules are activated only when corresponding structures occur in the source implementation. For example, crowding-distance methods require front-mask and subset-indexing rules, dominance-based methods require pairwise-comparison rules, and decomposition-based methods require weight-vector broadcasting and batched scalarization. Each retrieved rule therefore specifies an applicability condi-tion, a known failure pattern, and a corresponding transforma-tion requirement. The Rule Retriever filters rules whose appli-6

cability conditions match the structures recorded in S, ranks the retained rules by relevance to the identified mechanisms and transformation risks, and passes the resulting compact set as RS .

3) Tensorization Blueprint Construction: The tensorization blueprint B converts reconstructed algorithmic semantics into explicit target-side requirements. Unlike S, which describes the source implementation, B defines the admissible target realization. The Blueprint Agent constructs B from CS , S,and RS . It specifies the EvoX state architecture, execution workflow, tensor formulations, auxiliary-function contracts, and framework constraints shared by all candidate branches. The blueprint specifies both state mapping and compu-tational restructuring. It maps source variables to persis-tent EvoX states or temporary tensors and defines their target shapes, data types, initialization procedures, and up-date rules. It also maps the source workflow to the tar-get lifecycle, including initialization, variation, environmen-tal selection, state updates, and required helper functions. Operations on PlatEMO population objects are decomposed into synchronized updates of decision, objective, constraint, and auxiliary tensors. For computation-intensive structures, 

B records population-level formulations such as broadcasting for pairwise relations, batched scalarization for decomposition metrics, Boolean masks for conditional selection, and tensor indices for subset operations. When a procedure contains an unavoidable sequential dependency, the blueprint may retain a bounded loop, but the population-level work inside each iteration remains tensorized. The blueprint also fixes target-side constraints shared by all candidate branches. Candidate implementations must conform to the EvoX algorithm interface, maintain consistent devices and data types, update related states synchronously, and avoid unnecessary host-side computation or device synchronization. Individual-level population loops, NumPy fallbacks, repeated host-device transfers, and scalar extraction are disallowed unless the source analysis identifies an unavoidable sequential dependency. Because these constraints are fixed before can-didate generation, branch diversity reflects alternative compu-tational realizations rather than inconsistent interpretations of the source MOEA. 

E. Diversified Computational Restructuring 

Diversified restructuring treats tensorization as a constrained search over alternative target realizations. Given CS , B, RS ,and the strategy set S = {s1, . . . , s K }, multiple Tensorization Agents generate the candidate implementations {Ck}Kk=1 in parallel. All branches share the same reconstructed algorith-mic semantics, state architecture, framework constraints, and lifecycle requirements. Their differences therefore represent alternative restructuring hypotheses rather than independent interpretations of the source MOEA. EvoCoCo instantiates this strategy space with six transfor-mation biases. Broadcasting targets pairwise and population-level relations through dimension expansion. Einsum Op-timization targets tensor contraction and batched aggrega-tion. Masked Operations replaces data-dependent branches with Boolean tensor computation. In-Place Efficiency re-duces avoidable intermediate storage through state updates that remain consistent with the source mechanism. Advanced Operations uses high-level PyTorch operations for sorting, indexing, and gather or scatter patterns. Tensorized Iterative Selection retains bounded control loops for genuine sequential dependencies and uses preallocated tensor buffers and tensor-based indexing within each iteration. Each Tensorization Agent applies one strategy as its pri-mary restructuring bias and produces a self-contained EvoX implementation with the required lifecycle methods and helper functions. A strategy may change data layout, indexing, or control structure, but it must satisfy the common source-level and framework constraints encoded by B. Because all branches share these constraints, the strategy space exposes multiple realizations of the same source mechanism. The execution stage can then resolve choices that cannot be ranked reliably from static generation alone. In this sense, EvoCoCo searches the candidate program space through a generate– evaluate–refine–select cycle rather than a single source-to-target mapping. 

F. Execution-Guided Refinement and Candidate Selection 

Execution feedback resolves target-side constraints that can-not be established reliably before a candidate is run. Tensor shapes, framework interfaces, device placement, numerical behavior, and state transitions can remain invalid even when a candidate is syntactically complete. Consequently, the fi-nal part of the methodology closes the transformation loop through execution, diagnostic feedback, refinement, and selec-tion. Each branch is processed independently, so a failure in one computational realization does not prevent the remaining alternatives from being evaluated. 

1) Candidate Validation: Candidate validation separates static program checks from runtime execution checks. Static validation examines program integrity, dependencies, target interfaces, and state declarations. Runtime validation deter-mines whether the implementation initializes, executes, and updates its states correctly in EvoX. It also detects tensor, device, numerical, and control-flow failures that syntax alone cannot establish. A lightweight validation problem provides a common optimization signal during generation and refinement, while the complete benchmark-level evaluation is conducted separately. For candidate Ck, validation returns status rk,diagnostic feedback ek, performance-indicator result Hk, and execution time Tk.

2) Execution-Guided Refinement: The Repair Agent revises failed candidates without relaxing the source or framework constraints used for generation. It uses the diagnostic feedback 

ek, the source implementation CS , and the retrieved rules RS .Static refinement addresses local program and interface errors, while runtime refinement addresses tensor computation, state transitions, numerical behavior, and control flow. The repair step remains constrained by the source algorithmic semantics and blueprint, so correction of a target-side failure cannot replace the source MOEA with a nominally similar standard implementation. 7

Each revised candidate re-enters validation until it passes or reaches the maximum refinement budget I. Candidates that ex-haust this budget are marked invalid. Consequently, execution feedback becomes part of the transformation procedure rather than a post hoc debugging step. This loop is required because source analysis alone cannot fully determine target-framework constraints and target-side executability. 

3) Optimization-Aware Candidate Selection: Candidate se-lection uses a hierarchy of validated evidence rather than a fixed weighted score. Although candidates share the same blueprint, they can differ in observed optimization outcome, execution time, and degree of tensorization. For each validated candidate Ck, let Qk denote the code-level tensorization as-sessment produced by A SSESS TENSORIZATION (Ck, B ). Evo-CoCo represents the candidate as zk = (Ck, H k, T k, Q k)

and applies hierarchical selection to the validated set Z.The performance-indicator result Hk provides the primary signal for grouping candidates with comparable observed optimization outcomes. In the current EvoCoCo realization, an LLM-based qualitative assessment receives the performance-indicator results Hk of the validated candidates and returns the subset judged to have comparable observed optimization outcomes. Execution time Tk and tensorization assessment Qk

are then considered within this comparable group. The tensorization assessment Qk checks whether principal population-level computations are expressed through tensor operations without avoidable host-side processing, synchro-nization, or individual-level iteration. This selection procedure is a design choice in the current EvoCoCo realization. The methodological requirement is only that optimization outcome be considered after executability has been established. The selected implementation is denoted by C⋆T ; if no candidate survives validation and refinement, EvoCoCo returns F AIL .IV. B ENCHMARK DESIGN AND EVALUATION 

The evaluation separates three properties that answer dif-ferent validity questions. Migration reliability asks whether a source implementation can be converted into a usable target implementation. Optimization fidelity asks whether the selected implementation attains comparable optimization outcomes under matched settings. Computational scalability asks whether the restructuring exposes increasing runtime advantage as problem scale grows. These properties are evaluated separately because executability does not establish optimization fidelity, and acceleration is meaningful only for an implementation whose optimization outcomes satisfy the predefined criterion. 

A. Benchmark Construction 

The benchmark covers 48 MOEAs whose PlatEMO implementations expose heterogeneous computational structures. The selected MOEAs span dominance-based, decomposition-based, reference-guided, indicator-based, particle-swarm, archive-based, sparse, and large-scale paradigms. Their implementations differ in states, operators, control structures, helper functions, and update schedules. This diversity provides the testbed for evaluating semantics-guided restructuring. The detailed benchmark taxonomy and implementation provenance are provided in Section II-B of the Supplementary Document. For the experiments below, the generic notation is instantiated as CP ≡ CS for a PlatEMO source implementation and C⋆E ≡ C⋆T for the selected tensorized EvoX implementation. Generation-time validation is isolated from benchmark-level evaluation. During automatic tensorization, each candidate implementation is tested on a lightweight validation prob-lem under a fixed configuration, which provides diagnostic and performance signals for refinement and selection. Five independent migration attempts are performed for each source implementation. Algorithm 1 describes branch-level selection within one conversion attempt; after the five attempt-level out-puts are obtained, the converged outputs are compared using the same hierarchical evidence order, and the best converged attempt-level output is retained as the selected tensorized implementation C⋆E . The resulting 48 implementations are then fixed for all subsequent fidelity and scaling experiments, with no further repair or reselection based on benchmark results. They are independently evaluated on the DTLZ [38], WFG [39], LSMOP [40], and MaF [41] suites. 

B. Migration Reliability 

Migration reliability measures whether a source MOEA implementation can be transformed into a usable EvoX imple-mentation under the prescribed validation setting. The measure contains three cumulative levels. A syntax pass requires the generated implementation to be complete and syntactically valid. An execution pass further requires it to complete the validation workflow without interface errors, runtime excep-tions, invalid tensor states, persistent nonfinite values, or ter-mination failures. A convergence pass additionally requires the implementation to satisfy the predefined optimization criterion on the validation problem. A migration attempt is regarded as successful only when it reaches the convergence-pass level. Let Nsuccess denote the number of attempts that reach the convergence-pass level, and let Ntotal denote the total number of attempts. The migration success rate (MSR) is defined as 

MSR = Nsuccess 

Ntotal 

. (4) The syntax-pass and execution-pass rates locate failures within the transformation process. Failed attempts are categorized by the earliest observed stage as syntax, execution, or conver-gence failures. Numerical failures and timeouts are recorded as execution-stage subtypes, while tensorization violations are recorded separately because they characterize the computa-tional structure of an otherwise generated implementation rather than the migration outcome itself. 

C. Optimization Fidelity 

Optimization fidelity measures whether the selected ten-sorized implementation C⋆E attains optimization outcomes comparable to those of the corresponding PlatEMO implemen-tation CP across the evaluated benchmark problems. Exact 8

agreement is neither expected nor required because the two implementations may use different random-number generators, numerical libraries, and execution orders. Consequently, the comparison uses repeated independent runs under matched population sizes, objective and decision dimensions, and eval-uation budgets. For each MOEA–problem combination, C⋆E and CP are independently executed multiple times. Let IE and IP denote their mean IGD values, respectively. The absolute difference 

D and relative increase R are defined as 

D = IE − IP , R = IE − IP

IP

. (5) Two predefined tolerances, εabs = 0 .10 and εrel = 2 .0, ac-count for differences in IGD scale across benchmark problems. The absolute tolerance provides an absolute-scale criterion when baseline IGD is small, while the relative tolerance provides a scale-aware criterion when IGD values are larger. Section III-D of the Supplementary Document reports sensi-tivity to nearby tolerance settings. The classification separates improvement from tolerated degradation under the predefined fidelity criterion. A result is labeled Improved when IE ≤ IP , which indicates a better observed optimization outcome under the evaluated setting. When IE > IP , the result is labeled Preserved if either 

D ≤ εabs or R ≤ εrel . Otherwise, it is labeled IGD Degradation . Both Improved and Preserved count as passes under the predefined fidelity criterion. Reference validity is determined independently of the ten-sorized implementation. A PlatEMO reference is valid only when all 21 runs complete and produce finite final-IGD values. A MOEA–problem combination is labeled Reference invalid 

when the PlatEMO implementation encounters an execution error or timeout and fails to provide all 21 usable runs. Such cases are excluded from the corresponding coverage denom-inators, so reference failure is not interpreted as evidence against the tensorized implementation. Let N pass and N valid denote the numbers of fidelity-passing and valid MOEA–problem comparisons, respectively. The overall fidelity coverage is 

ρoverall = N pass 

N valid . (6) For MOEA a, let N pass  

> a

and N valid  

> a

denote the numbers of fidelity-passing and valid problem comparisons. Its fidelity coverage is 

ρa = N pass 

> a

N valid 

> a

. (7) A MOEA satisfies the algorithm-level fidelity criterion when 

ρa ≥ 80% . At the framework level, the predefined criterion is satisfied when ρoverall ≥ 80% and at least 80% of the MOEAs satisfy the algorithm-level criterion. 

D. Computational Scalability 

Computational scalability measures how the runtime ad-vantage of the selected tensorized implementations changes with problem scale. For the same MOEA and problem setting, let RP and RE denote the measured execution times of the PlatEMO and EvoX implementations, respectively, and let GP

and GE denote their corresponding numbers of completed generations. Speedup is defined using the average execution time per generation as 

Speedup = RP /G P

RE /G E

. (8) The scaling protocol varies either population size or de-cision dimension while holding the remaining settings fixed. Initialization and warm-up are excluded from the measured execution time, and GPU operations are synchronized before and after timing. Measured aggregates include only pairs completed by both implementations. PlatEMO timeouts are shown as lower-bound speedups in the scale-wise distribu-tions and reported separately in the exception counts. Out-of-memory (OOM) events and execution failures are also reported separately. Speedup is interpreted jointly with migration reliability and optimization fidelity. The scaling study does not seek to establish a universal GPU advantage for every implementation. Instead, it tests whether computational restructuring exposes increasing population-level tensor parallelism as problem scale grows. V. E XPERIMENTAL STUDY 

The five research questions (RQs) form a progressive evi-dence chain for the proposed methodology. RQ1 asks whether heterogeneous source implementations can be transformed reliably. RQ2 examines whether the selected tensorized imple-mentations retain comparable optimization outcomes under the predefined fidelity criterion. RQ3 asks whether the resulting restructuring provides increasing runtime advantage as popula-tion size or decision dimension grows. RQ4 examines transfer to MATLAB implementations outside the main PlatEMO source set. RQ5 analyzes which components contribute to migration reliability. The experiments use two hardware environments. The mi-gration, transfer, and ablation experiments were conducted on a Windows 11 workstation with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5060 Ti GPU and an Intel Core Ultra 7 265K CPU. The optimization-fidelity and computational-scalability exper-iments were conducted on a server with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU and an AMD EPYC 7543 CPU. 

A. RQ1: Migration Reliability 

RQ1 compares EvoCoCo with direct one-shot LLM transla-tion in terms of migration reliability. The primary comparisons use matched model backends, so EvoCoCo and the one-shot baseline share the same underlying LLM. EvoCoCo includes parallel candidate generation, execution-guided refinement, and selection, whereas a one-shot attempt generates one target implementation directly. Consequently, the comparison measures realized workflow reliability rather than resource-normalized generation efficiency. Cross-backend results are reported separately because they also reflect differences in model capability. 9                                                         

> TABLE I MIGRATION RESULTS ACROSS THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS ,WITH 240 INDEPENDENT CONVERSION ATTEMPTS PER CONDITION . IGD AND RUNTIME STATISTICS ARE COMPUTED ONLY OVER CONVERGED ATTEMPTS .
> Method Syntax pass Execution pass Convergence pass Algs. with ≥1pass Median IGD ↓Mean runtime (s) ↓
> GLM-5.1 one-shot 99.58% 72.92% 61.67% 45/48 0.07347 3.59 DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 100.00% 35.00% 27.08% 32/48 0.07826 2.81 DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 100.00% 26.25% 16.67% 24/48 0.07431 2.13 Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 100.00% 37.08% 26.67% 25/48 0.07304 8.71 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 97.08% 79.58% 59.58% 47/48 0.08299 6.34 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 99.17% 84.58% 65.42% 46/48 0.07928 2.99 EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 100.00% 93.33% 78.75% 48/48 0.07477 3.86

1) Experimental Settings: The migration benchmark con-tains the PlatEMO implementations of 48 MOEAs. Seven conditions are evaluated: four one-shot conditions using GLM-5.1, DeepSeek V4 Pro, DeepSeek V4 Flash, and Gemini 3 Flash, and three EvoCoCo conditions using Gemini 3 Flash, DeepSeek V4 Pro, and DeepSeek V4 Flash. The reasoning-effort setting is left at the provider default for GLM-5.1, set to 

minimal for all Gemini 3 Flash conditions, and set to low 

for all DeepSeek V4 conditions. Each condition uses five independent conversion attempts for every source implementation, which yields 240 attempts per condition. A one-shot attempt generates one output di-rectly. In contrast, each EvoCoCo attempt constructs six strategy-guided candidates and applies validation, execution-guided repair, and branch-level selection. Migration metrics are computed at the attempt level from the final output. For EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash, after each attempt has returned its branch-selected output, the converged attempt-level outputs are compared using the same hierarchical evidence order, and the best one is retained for each MOEA in the subsequent fidelity and scaling experiments. Each output is evaluated on DTLZ2 with population size 

N = 100 , M = 3 objectives, decision dimension D = 12 ,and 100 generations. An attempt passes the convergence test if it completes without persistent nonfinite values and achieves a final IGD below 0.25 within the 60-s time limit. Conditional IGD and runtime statistics are computed only over converged attempts. 

2) Comparison Results: EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash attains the highest migration reliability among the seven evaluated conditions. Its execution and convergence pass rates reach 93.33% and 78.75%, respectively, and all 48 benchmark MOEAs have at least one converged implementation. Among the one-shot conditions, GLM-5.1 performs best, with an execution pass rate of 72.92%, a convergence pass rate of 61.67%, and coverage of 45 benchmark MOEAs. Relative to this strongest one-shot condition, EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash increases the execution and convergence pass rates by 20.41 and 17.08 percentage points, respectively, and extends coverage to all 48 benchmark MOEAs. The matched-backend comparisons reduce confounding from model choice when assessing differences associated with the EvoCoCo workflow. As shown in Fig. 3, EvoCoCo increases the convergence pass rate by 52.08 percentage points over Gemini 3 Flash one-shot, by 38.34 points over DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot, and by 42.91 points over DeepSeek V4 0 20 40 60 80      

> Convergence rate (%) DeepSeek V4 Flash DeepSeek V4 Pro Gemini 3 Flash
> 16.67 59.58
> +42.91 pp 27.08 65.42
> +38.34 pp 26.67 78.75
> +52.08 pp GLM-5.1: 61.67% One-shot EvoCoCo
> Fig. 3. Convergence improvements of EvoCoCo over one-shot translation under matched model backends. Each condition contains 240 independent conversion attempts. Labels show convergence pass rates, arrows indicate percentage-point improvements, and the dashed line denotes the best one-shot result.

Flash one-shot. At the MOEA level, EvoCoCo produces more converged attempts than the corresponding one-shot method on 38, 35, and 43 of the 48 benchmark MOEAs for the three matched backends, respectively. Thus, the complete EvoCoCo workflow attains higher migration reliability than direct one-shot translation under all three matched-backend settings. Detailed migration results are provided in Section II of the Supplementary Document. Model choice still affects migration performance within EvoCoCo. Gemini 3 Flash produces 189 converged attempts, compared with 157 for DeepSeek V4 Pro and 143 for DeepSeek V4 Flash. However, the differences are not uniform across MOEAs. DeepSeek V4 Pro, for example, produces more converged attempts overall than DeepSeek V4 Flash but covers one fewer benchmark MOEA. These results indicate that backend capability affects individual conversions, whereas the matched-backend comparisons more directly reflect differ-ences associated with the EvoCoCo workflow. 

B. RQ2: Optimization Fidelity 

RQ2 evaluates whether the selected tensorized implementa-tions retain comparable optimization outcomes after successful migration. The analysis reports problem-level fidelity and coverage across the 48 benchmark MOEAs. 

1) Experimental Settings: The 48 selected tensorized im-plementations from the primary migration experiment are evaluated on DTLZ1–DTLZ7, WFG1–WFG9, LSMOP1– LSMOP9, and MaF1–MaF15. This design yields 1,920 MOEA–problem combinations. 10                                                

> TABLE II OPTIMIZATION FIDELITY ACROSS THE DTLZ, WFG, LSMOP, AND MAF
> BENCHMARK SUITES .
> Suite Valid Improved Preserved IGD degr. Passes Coverage DTLZ 332 141 138 53 279 84.0% WFG 429 161 253 15 414 96.5% LSMOP 427 149 213 65 362 84.8% MaF 716 273 352 91 625 87.3% Overall 1,904 724 956 224 1,680 88.2% 1816 24 32 40 48
> Algorithm index
> 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Fidelity coverage (%)
> 41/48 algorithms pass
> Pass Below 80%
> Fig. 4. Optimization-fidelity coverage of the 48 tensorized implementations, ordered by increasing coverage. Filled and open markers indicate algorithms above and below the 80% threshold, respectively.

For each combination, EvoX and PlatEMO are indepen-dently executed 21 times under matched experimental settings. The population size is set to N = 100 , and the number of objectives is fixed at three. Both implementations use the same decision dimension, variable bounds, and a budget of 100 generations. Final IGD is the primary performance metric. Each combi-nation is evaluated using the arithmetic mean of the final IGD values from the 21 runs. Outcomes are classified as Improved, Preserved, or IGD Degradation according to the combined absolute and relative tolerance rule defined in Section IV. A combination is labeled Reference invalid if PlatEMO does not provide the required number of usable reference runs, and such combinations are excluded from the effective denominators. Framework-level fidelity is then assessed using the overall and algorithm-level coverage criteria defined in Section IV. 

2) Comparison Results: Overall fidelity coverage reaches 88.2% across the valid benchmark comparisons. Among the 1,920 MOEA–problem combinations, 16 PlatEMO references are unavailable because of execution errors or incomplete reference runs. The remaining 1,904 comparisons include 724 Improved cases and 956 Preserved cases, which yields 1,680 passes under the predefined fidelity criterion. The other 224 comparisons show IGD degradation. Fidelity coverage remains above 80% in all four bench-mark families. WFG achieves the highest aggregate coverage at 96.5% (414/429), followed by MaF at 87.3% (625/716), LSMOP at 84.8% (362/427), and DTLZ at 84.0% (279/332). Consequently, the overall result is not dominated by a single benchmark suite. The differences among the four families also indicate that optimization fidelity varies with problem characteristics. Algorithm-level coverage shows a similar pattern. As shown in Fig. 4, 41 of the 48 tensorized implementations achieve at least 80% fidelity coverage over their valid ref-erence problems. Thus, 85.4% of the benchmark MOEAs satisfy the algorithm-level criterion. The seven MOEAs below this criterion are MaOEA-CSS (18/40), OSP-NSDE (23/38), BCE-MOEA-D (29/40), NSGA-II-SDR (29/40), TS-SparseEA (29/40), MOEA-D-PaS (30/40), and TS-NSGA-II (30/40). Taken together, the overall and algorithm-level results sat-isfy the two predefined 80% fidelity thresholds. They therefore provide empirical support for comparable optimization out-comes across the evaluated problems and MOEAs under the stated criterion. However, they do not imply trajectory-level or element-wise equivalence between the two implementations. 

C. RQ3: Computational Scalability 

RQ3 evaluates whether computational restructuring pro-duces increasing runtime advantage as problem scale grows. Population size and decision dimension are varied separately because they stress different population-level operations and memory patterns in the tensorized implementations. 

1) Experimental Settings: Runtime scalability is evaluated on DTLZ3 with three objectives. For population scaling, the population size is successively doubled from 256 to 16384 while the decision dimension remains fixed at D = 12 . For dimension scaling, the population size remains fixed at 1000 while the decision dimension is successively doubled from 1024 to 65536. EvoX executes the tensorized implementations on the GPU, and PlatEMO serves as the CPU baseline. The EvoX workflow step is compiled using 

torch.compile . Initialization and compilation costs are excluded from runtime measurements. Runtime is measured in milliseconds per generation and averaged over 100 generations. A three-hour runtime limit is imposed for 100 generations, corresponding to 108000 ms/gen. When PlatEMO reaches this limit, the corresponding speedup is reported as a lower bound. Insufficient-memory cases and execution errors are reported separately. 

2) Comparison Results: Dimension scaling yields larger aggregate runtime gains than population scaling. As shown in Table III, the median measured speedup is 22 .6× un-der population scaling and 80 .2× under decision-dimension scaling, while the corresponding geometric means are 29 .9×

and 71 .5×. The interquartile ranges are 4.5–163 .5× and 8.4–

404 .9×, respectively. These statistics indicate a higher central tendency under dimension scaling together with substantial heterogeneity across MOEAs and scale settings. The scale-wise distributions show that the typical run-time advantage generally increases with computational scale, although heterogeneity remains across implementations. PlatEMO timeout cases with valid EvoX runtimes are included in Fig. 5 as lower-bound speedups. The median reported speedup under population scaling rises from 4.5× at N = 256 

to 77 .5× at N = 16384 . Under decision-dimension scaling, the corresponding median rises from 62 .1× at D = 1024 to 

194 .8× at D = 65536 . The widening interquartile ranges at several scales further show that the benefit varies with the 11 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population size 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4      

> Speedup (x)
> 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536

Decision dimension 

Fig. 5. Distribution of speedups across the 48 tensorized implementations as population size (left) or decision dimension (right) increases. Boxes show the interquartile range, center lines show medians, and whiskers show the 10th–90th percentiles. The dashed line denotes 1× speedup. 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

> Population Size
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Runtime (ms/gen)  EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU)
> 37339.0x

(a) MOEA/D-DE ( N )256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384  

> Population Size
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Runtime (ms/gen)  EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU)
> 5865.7x

(b) WASF-GA ( N )1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536  

> Dimension
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Runtime (ms/gen)
> EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU)
> 7771.6x

(c) PESA-II ( D)1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536  

> Dimension
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> Runtime (ms/gen)
> EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU)
> 1935.9x

(d) LSMOF ( D)

Fig. 6. Runtime scaling of four representative tensorized MOEAs. (a) MOEA/D-DE and (b) WASF-GA are evaluated by successively doubling the population size. (c) PESA-II and (d) LSMOF are evaluated by successively doubling the decision dimension. Annotations indicate the speedups at the largest evaluated scale. TABLE III AGGREGATE RUNTIME SCALING OF THE 48 TENSORIZED IMPLEMENTATIONS . M EDIAN , GEOMETRIC MEAN , AND INTERQUARTILE RANGE (IQR; 25 TH –75 TH PERCENTILE ) ARE COMPUTED ONLY FOR CASES COMPLETED BY BOTH PLAT EMO AND EVO X. T IMEOUT AND EXCEPTIONAL CASES ARE REPORTED SEPARATELY .            

> Scaling axis Measured pairs Median Geomean IQR Population size 289 22 .6×29 .9×4.5–163 .5×
> Decision dimension 276 80 .2×71 .5×8.4–404 .9×

computational structure of the underlying MOEA implemen-tation. Representative scaling trajectories illustrate the upper range of the observed runtime gains without characterizing their typical magnitude. As shown in Fig. 6, MOEA/D-DE and WASF-GA achieve speedups of 37339 .0× and 5865 .7×, re-spectively, at N = 16384 . PESA-II and LSMOF achieve 

7771 .6× and 1935 .9×, respectively, at D = 65536 . Among all completed runs, MOEA/D-DE has the largest measured speedup under population scaling, while DM-MOEA reaches the largest measured speedup of 23467 .4× under decision-dimension scaling at D = 8192 . For PlatEMO timeout cases, the largest reported lower bounds are 29900 .3× for MaOEA-CSS at N = 1024 and 105365 .9× at D = 2048 and 

D = 4096 . These values describe extreme cases, whereas Ta-ble III provides the distributional summary used to characterize typical acceleration. Boundary cases further characterize the scaling regime. At the largest settings, some PlatEMO runs reach the three-hour runtime limit or encounter execution failures, while some EvoX runs encounter GPU out-of-memory conditions. Execution failures and OOM events are reported separately. Table III summarizes measured speedups only for settings completed by both implementations. Together with the fidelity results, the scaling experiments show that the selected tensorized implementations can gain runtime advantage as population size or decision dimension grows while satisfying the predefined optimization-fidelity criterion in the corresponding benchmark evaluation. Detailed scaling results are provided in Section IV of the Supplemen-tary Document. 

D. RQ4: Transfer to External MOEA Implementations 

RQ4 evaluates transfer beyond the PlatEMO implementa-tions used in the main benchmark. The ten source programs are drawn from external or legacy MATLAB and Octave code bases with different coding conventions, helper functions, and program structures, while EvoX remains the target framework. 

1) Experimental Settings: The transfer set includes imple-mentations of ten MOEAs: DEMO, DEMO-IBEA, DEMO-PBEA, ISDE+, LSMaODE, PAR-DEMO-IND, PAR-DEMO-NDS, RTEA, R-DEMO, and Two-Arch2. LSMaODE is based on an earlier version of PlatEMO and is not directly compat-ible with the current version, while Two-Arch2 uses an inde-12 

pendent implementation. EvoCoCo and the one-shot baseline each perform five independent migration attempts for every MOEA, which yields 50 attempts per method. During migration, each generated implementation under-goes a lightweight 50-generation run for execution validation. This run is used only for generation and repair and is excluded from the final evaluation. For the final benchmark, complete implementations are evaluated on DTLZ2 with population size 

N = 100 , three objectives, decision dimension D = 12 , and 100 generations. An executable implementation is considered converged if its final IGD is below 0.25. 

2) Comparison Results: EvoCoCo attains higher migration reliability than one-shot generation on the external and legacy source set. As shown in Table IV, EvoCoCo achieves syntax and execution pass rates of 100.00% and 96.00%, compared with 70.00% and 34.00% for the one-shot baseline. Of the 50 EvoCoCo attempts, 31 satisfy the convergence threshold, which yields a convergence rate of 62.00%; only 9 of the 50 one-shot attempts converge, corresponding to 18.00%. At the MOEA level, EvoCoCo produces at least one converged result for nine of the ten MOEAs, compared with two for one-shot generation. Failure analysis shows that the largest difference appears before optimization-level evaluation. For one-shot generation, 15 attempts fail the syntax check and another 18 fail during execution, which leaves 17 executable attempts. In contrast, all EvoCoCo attempts pass the syntax check and only two fail during execution. Manual inspection shows that many syn-tactically invalid one-shot outputs are incomplete and termi-nate within expressions, imports, function calls, or formatted strings. Among the 48 executable EvoCoCo results, 31 satisfy the convergence criterion, while the remaining 17 execute successfully but do not reach the specified IGD threshold. The remaining transfer failures occur primarily after suc-cessful execution. This pattern indicates that optimization-level validity is a more restrictive transfer requirement than syntactic or runtime validity. Thus, the external-source study supports transfer of the staged transformation process while identifying optimization validity as the main remaining limitation. De-tailed results are provided in Section V of the Supplementary Document. 

E. RQ5: Component Contributions 

RQ5 evaluates how the major EvoCoCo components con-tribute to migration reliability. The tested components are blueprint construction, execution-guided refinement, context-aware rule retrieval, and multi-branch generation and selection.             

> TABLE IV MIGRATION PERFORMANCE ON TEN ALGORITHMS BEYOND THE MAIN
> PLAT EMO SETTING ,WITH 50 ATTEMPTS PER METHOD .
> Metric EvoCoCo One-shot Syntax pass 100.00% (50/50) 70.00% (35/50) Execution pass 96.00% (48/50) 34.00% (17/50) Converged 62.00% (31/50) 18.00% (9/50)

1) Experimental Settings: The ablation study uses a di-agnostic subset of 12 MOEAs: BCE-IBEA, NSGA-II-SDR, AGE-MOEA, GrEA, SMPSO, SparseEA, MOEA-D-AWA, MOEA-D-PaS, DM-MOEA, SIBEA, Two-Arch2, and WOF. The subset spans consistently successful cases, convergence-challenging cases, decomposition-based MOEAs, runtime-sensitive cases, and implementations with complex program structures. Each source implementation is migrated five times under each variant, which yields 60 attempts per variant and 300 attempts in total. All variants use Gemini 3 Flash and follow the same DTLZ2 validation setting and convergence criterion as the primary migration experiment. Full EvoCoCo serves as the reference configuration. The four ablated variants are w/o Blueprint Agent, w/o Repair Agent, w/o Rule Retrieval, and w/o Multi-Branch. The first three remove the named component, while w/o Multi-Branch uses one tensorization branch instead of generating and selecting among multiple branches. 

2) Comparison Results: Execution-guided repair has the largest effect on execution reliability in the ablation study. Full EvoCoCo achieves an execution pass rate of 98.3% and a convergence rate of 83.3%, while all variants maintain a 100.0% syntax pass rate. Removing the Repair Agent reduces the execution pass rate to 60.0% and the convergence rate to 41.7%. The corresponding failures are mainly associated with EvoX API misuse, unavailable APIs, and tensor-shape mismatches. This failure profile is consistent with the role of runtime feedback in resolving errors that code generation alone does not expose. Multi-branch generation also contributes to migration reli-ability. Using one branch reduces the execution pass rate to 68.3% and the convergence rate to 40.0%. Thus, alternative tensorization strategies increase the likelihood of obtaining an executable and converged implementation. Removing rule retrieval or Blueprint Agent produces smaller reductions in execution and convergence rates. Their failure records contain more dependency, interface, and initialization-related errors, which indicates that these components primarily support code construction and adaptation to the EvoX workflow. Conditional IGD must be interpreted together with con-vergence rate because it is computed only over converged attempts. Although w/o Blueprint Agent achieves the lowest average IGD of 0.0814, its convergence rate is 78.3%, com-pared with 83.3% for Full EvoCoCo. Taken together, the ab-lation results assign distinct roles to the four components: the Blueprint Agent and rule retrieval support code construction, the Repair Agent improves execution reliability, and the multi-branch mechanism increases the likelihood of obtaining a converged tensorized implementation. Detailed ablation results are provided in Section VI of the Supplementary Document. 

F. Discussion 

Migration results show that automatic tensorization is con-strained more by target-side executability than by code com-pletion alone. Most failures occur after syntactically valid code has been produced, when the target implementation must 13                                      

> TABLE V ABLATION RESULTS ON A DIAGNOSTIC SUBSET OF 12 ALGORITHMS ,WITH 60 ATTEMPTS EVALUATED FOR EACH VARIANT . A VERAGE IGD IS COMPUTED OVER CONVERGED ATTEMPTS ONLY .
> Variant Removed component Syntax pass Exec. pass Converged Avg. IGD w/o Blueprint Agent Blueprint Agent 100.0% 95.0% 78.3% 0.0814
> w/o Repair Agent Repair Agent 100.0% 60.0% 41.7% 0.1005 w/o Rule Retrieval rule retrieval 100.0% 93.3% 75.0% 0.0993 w/o Multi-Branch Multi-branch generation and selection 100.0% 68.3% 40.0% 0.1036 Full EvoCoCo None 100.0% 98.3% 83.3% 0.0944

satisfy framework requirements, tensor-state consistency, and optimization requirements simultaneously. The ablation results support the same interpretation. Execution-guided refinement and diversified restructuring contribute directly to reliability, while blueprint construction and rule retrieval constrain how the source implementation is reconstructed and realized. Beyond role specialization, EvoCoCo also introduces an evolution-like mechanism into program restructuring. Candi-date implementations are generated as alternative realizations of a shared semantic blueprint, exposed to execution feedback, refined when necessary, and selected according to target-side evidence. This process is evolutionary in structure, although EvoCoCo is not formulated as a conventional evolutionary algorithm. Optimization fidelity defines a deeper boundary between tensorization and reimplementation. The source and target programs can differ in data layout, execution order, and control structure while still encoding the same principal operators and persistent states. However, small deviations in normalization, reference association, environmental selection, or state updates can accumulate differently across problem landscapes. Lower coverage on DTLZ1, DTLZ6, LSMOP6, LSMOP7, MaF3, MaF6, and MaF9 illustrates this sensitivity. The fixed DTLZ2 validation setting cannot expose every problem-dependent deviation before final evaluation. Consequently, the fidelity results indicate empirical outcome agreement under the pre-defined criterion rather than trajectory-level equivalence. Computational scaling also reveals a runtime-memory trade-off. As population size or decision dimension grows, the selected EvoX implementations increasingly benefit from population-level GPU execution, while several PlatEMO runs reach timeout or execution limits. However, the scaling exper-iments also record EvoX out-of-memory cases at the largest settings. Thus, computational restructuring can exchange a CPU runtime bottleneck for GPU memory pressure because broadcasting and batched intermediate tensors may increase peak memory use. More memory-efficient restructuring strate-gies are required when intermediate tensor materialization becomes the dominant cost. These observations define the scope of the claims supported by the present methodology and multi-agent framework. The experiments establish feasibility for heterogeneous PlatEMO-to-EvoX transformation and provide additional evidence on a limited set of external and legacy MATLAB implementa-tions. They do not establish framework-independent generality, resource-normalized superiority over direct translation, formal program equivalence, or exact stochastic trajectory equiva-lence. Within this scope, the results support a constrained program-restructuring view of automatic tensorization: the tar-get computation may change considerably, while reconstructed algorithmic states, operators, dependencies, and update rela-tions bound the admissible changes. Future work will extend the methodology to additional source and target environments and develop validation and restructuring strategies for different MOEA structures and memory regimes. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This work formulates automatic tensorization for multiob-jective evolutionary algorithms as semantics-guided computa-tional restructuring and develops EvoCoCo as a multi-agent framework that realizes this formulation across heterogeneous MOEA implementations. EvoCoCo maps the methodologi-cal decomposition to specialized roles for semantic analysis, rule retrieval, blueprint construction, diversified restructuring, execution-guided repair, and candidate selection. A shared tensorization blueprint coordinates these roles and constrains alternative computational realizations. The experiments on 48 MOEAs show that the framework can produce executable tensorized implementations across heterogeneous algorithmic structures, satisfy the predefined optimization-fidelity criterion in most valid comparisons, and expose increasing GPU acceleration as computational scale grows. External-source and ablation studies further examine transfer and component roles. Together, these results support automatic tensorization for MOEAs as a structured transforma-tion methodology in which implementation-level computation may change considerably while remaining constrained by the underlying MOEA. The current evidence remains specific to the evaluated source and target environments. It does not imply exact stochastic equivalence, framework-independent generality, or resource-normalized superiority over direct translation. Future work will extend the methodology and multi-agent frame-work to additional programming environments, strengthen optimization-aware validation, and develop memory-efficient restructuring strategies for larger computational scales. REFERENCES [1] C. A. Coello Coello, G. B. Lamont, and D. A. Van Veldhuizen,           

> Evolutionary Algorithms for Solving Multi-Objective Problems , 2nd ed., ser. Genetic and Evolutionary Computation. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2007. [2] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, 2002. [3] Q. Zhang and H. Li, “MOEA/D: A multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Compu-tation , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 712–731, 2007. 14

[4] S. Liu, Q. Lin, J. Li, and K. C. Tan, “A survey on learnable evolutionary algorithms for scalable multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1941–1961, 2023. [5] T. Chugh, K. Sindhya, J. Hakanen, and K. Miettinen, “A survey on handling computationally expensive multiobjective optimization prob-lems with evolutionary algorithms,” Soft Computing , vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 3137–3166, 2019. [6] Y. Tian et al. , “Evolutionary large-scale multi-objective optimization: A survey,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 54, no. 8, Oct. 2021. [7] J. Kłosko, M. Benecki, G. Wcisło, J. Dajda, and W. Turek, “High per-formance evolutionary computation with tensor-based acceleration,” in 

Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference ,2022, pp. 805–813. [8] B. Huang, R. Cheng, Z. Li, Y. Jin, and K. C. Tan, “EvoX: A distributed GPU-accelerated framework for scalable evolutionary computation,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 1649–1662, 2025. [9] Z. Liang, H. Li, N. Yu, K. Sun, and R. Cheng, “Bridging evolutionary multiobjective optimization and GPU acceleration via tensorization,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 420–434, 2026. [10] Z. Liang, T. Jiang, K. Sun, and R. Cheng, “GPU-accelerated evolutionary multiobjective optimization using tensorized RVEA,” in Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference , 2024, pp. 566– 575. [11] H. Li, Z. Liang, and R. Cheng, “GPU-accelerated evolutionary many-objective optimization using tensorized NSGA-III,” in 2025 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , 2025, pp. 1–8. [12] W. Huang et al. , “Fully tensorized GPU-accelerated multi-population evolutionary algorithm for constrained multiobjective optimization prob-lems,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , pp. 1–1, 2026. [13] M. Chen et al. , “Evaluating large language models trained on code,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021. [14] B. Roziere, M.-A. Lachaux, L. Chanussot, and G. Lample, “Unsuper-vised translation of programming languages,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 33, 2020. [15] J. Yang et al. , “SWE-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 37, 2024. [16] A. Ouyang et al. , “KernelBench: Can LLMs write efficient GPU ker-nels?” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 267. PMLR, 2025, pp. 47 356–47 415. [17] E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele, “SPEA2: Improving the strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm,” Computer Engineering and Networks Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Tech. Rep. 103, 2001. [18] K. Deb and H. Jain, “An evolutionary many-objective optimization algorithm using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach, part I: Solving problems with box constraints,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 577–601, 2014. [19] R. Cheng, Y. Jin, M. Olhofer, and B. Sendhoff, “A reference vector guided evolutionary algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 773–791, 2016. [20] J. Bader and E. Zitzler, “HypE: An algorithm for fast hypervolume-based many-objective optimization,” Evolutionary Computation , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 45–76, 2011. [21] Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, Y. Su, X. Zhang, K. C. Tan, and Y. Jin, “Balancing objective optimization and constraint satisfaction in constrained evolu-tionary multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics ,vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 9559–9572, 2022. [22] W. Li, X. Yao, K. Li, R. Wang, T. Zhang, and L. Wang, “Coevolutionary framework for generalized multimodal multi-objective optimization,” 

IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1544–1556, 2023. [23] X. Zhang, X. Zheng, R. Cheng, J. Qiu, and Y. Jin, “A competitive mechanism based multi-objective particle swarm optimizer with fast convergence,” Information Sciences , vol. 427, pp. 63–76, 2018. [24] H. Zille, H. Ishibuchi, S. Mostaghim, and Y. Nojima, “A framework for large-scale multiobjective optimization based on problem transforma-tion,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 260–275, 2018. [25] C. He et al. , “Accelerating large-scale multiobjective optimization via problem reformulation,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computa-tion , vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 949–961, 2019. [26] Y. Tian, X. Zhang, C. Wang, and Y. Jin, “An evolutionary algorithm for large-scale sparse multiobjective optimization problems,” IEEE Trans-actions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 380–393, 2020. [27] J. J. Durillo and A. J. Nebro, “jMetal: A Java framework for multi-objective optimization,” Advances in Engineering Software , vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 760–771, 2011. [28] F.-A. Fortin, F.-M. De Rainville, M.-A. Gardner, M. Parizeau, and C. Gagn´ e, “DEAP: Evolutionary algorithms made easy,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 13, no. 70, pp. 2171–2175, Jul. 2012. [29] F. Biscani and D. Izzo, “A parallel global multiobjective framework for optimization: pagmo,” Journal of Open Source Software , vol. 5, no. 53, p. 2338, 2020. [30] J. Blank and K. Deb, “pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in Python,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 89 497–89 509, 2020. [31] Y. Tian, R. Cheng, X. Zhang, and Y. Jin, “PlatEMO: A MATLAB plat-form for evolutionary multi-objective optimization [educational forum],” 

IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 73–87, 2017. [32] S. Lu et al. , “CodeXGLUE: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding and generation,” in Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1) , 2021. [33] R. Puri et al. , “CodeNet: A large-scale AI for code dataset for learning a diversity of coding tasks,” in Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2) , 2021. [34] A. Almeida, L. Xavier, and M. T. Valente, “Automatic library migration using large language models: First results,” in Proceedings of the 18th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement , 2024, pp. 427–433. [35] C. Ziftci, S. Nikolov, A. Sj¨ ovall, B. Kim, D. Codecasa, and M. Kim, “Migrating code at scale with LLMs at Google,” in Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2025, pp. 162–173. [36] H. Le, Y. Wang, A. D. Gotmare, S. Savarese, and S. C. H. Hoi, “CodeRL: Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep rein-forcement learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 35, 2022. [37] J. Liu, C. S. Xia, Y. Wang, and L. Zhang, “Is your code generated by ChatGPT really correct? Rigorous evaluation of large language models for code generation,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, 2023. [38] K. Deb, L. Thiele, M. Laumanns, and E. Zitzler, “Scalable test problems for evolutionary multiobjective optimization,” in Evolutionary Multiob-jective Optimization: Theoretical Advances and Applications . Springer, 2005, pp. 105–145. [39] S. Huband, P. Hingston, L. Barone, and L. While, “A review of multiobjective test problems and a scalable test problem toolkit,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 477–506, 2006. [40] R. Cheng, Y. Jin, M. Olhofer, and B. Sendhoff, “Test problems for large-scale multiobjective and many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transac-tions on Cybernetics , vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 4108–4121, 2017. [41] R. Cheng et al. , “A benchmark test suite for evolutionary many-objective optimization,” Complex & Intelligent Systems , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 67–81, 2017. [42] C. A. Coello Coello and N. Cruz Cort´ es, “Solving multiobjective optimization problems using an artificial immune system,” Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines , vol. 6, pp. 163–190, 2005. [43] E. Zitzler, L. Thiele, M. Laumanns, C. M. Fonseca, and V. G. da Fon-seca, “Performance assessment of multiobjective optimizers: an analysis and review,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–132, 2003. [44] A. Panichella, “An adaptive evolutionary algorithm based on non-euclidean geometry for many-objective optimization,” in Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference , 2019, pp. 595–603. [45] M. Li, S. Yang, and X. Liu, “Bi-goal evolution for many-objective optimization problems,” Artificial Intelligence , vol. 228, pp. 45–65, 2015. [46] K. Deb, M. Mohan, and S. Mishra, “Towards a quick computation of well-spread Pareto-optimal solutions,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 222–236. [47] S. Kukkonen and J. Lampinen, “GDE3: The third evolution step of gen-eralized differential evolution,” in 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , 2005, pp. 443–450. 15 

[48] S. Yang, M. Li, X. Liu, and J. Zheng, “A grid-based evolutionary algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-lutionary Computation , vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 721–736, 2013. [49] X. Zhang, Y. Tian, and Y. Jin, “A knee point-driven evolutionary algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-lutionary Computation , vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 761–776, 2015. [50] C. S. R. Mendes, A. F. R. Ara´ ujo, and L. R. C. Farias, “Non-dominated sorting bidirectional differential coevolution,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics , 2023, pp. 1709–1714. [51] Y. Tian, R. Cheng, X. Zhang, Y. Su, and Y. Jin, “A strengthened dominance relation considering convergence and diversity for evolution-ary many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 331–345, 2019. [52] D. W. Corne, N. R. Jerram, J. D. Knowles, and M. J. Oates, “PESA-II: Region-based selection in evolutionary multiobjective optimization,” in 

Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation , 2001, pp. 283–290. [53] S. Jiang and S. Yang, “A strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm based on reference direction for multiobjective and many-objective optimization,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 329–346, 2017. [54] Y. Yuan, H. Xu, B. Wang, and X. Yao, “A new dominance relation-based evolutionary algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 16–37, 2016. [55] M. Li, S. Yang, and X. Liu, “Pareto or Non-Pareto: Bi-criterion evolution in multiobjective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 645–665, 2016. [56] Y. Yuan, H. Xu, B. Wang, B. Zhang, and X. Yao, “Balancing conver-gence and diversity in decomposition-based many-objective optimizers,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 180–198, 2016. [57] R. Saborido, A. B. Ruiz, and M. Luque, “Global WASF-GA: An evolutionary algorithm in multiobjective optimization to approximate the whole Pareto optimal front,” Evolutionary Computation , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 309–349, 2017. [58] Y. Qi, X. Ma, F. Liu, L. Jiao, J. Sun, and J. Wu, “MOEA/D with adaptive weight adjustment,” Evolutionary Computation , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 231– 264, 2014. [59] T. Takagi, K. Takadama, and H. Sato, “A distribution control of weight vector set for multi-objective evolutionary algorithms,” in Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecom-munications Engineering Bio-inspired Information and Communication Technologies . Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 70–80. [60] H. Li and Q. Zhang, “Multiobjective optimization problems with com-plicated Pareto sets, MOEA/D and NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 284–302, 2009. [61] Q. Zhang, W. Liu, and H. Li, “The performance of a new version of MOEA/D on CEC09 unconstrained MOP test instances,” in 2009 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation , 2009, pp. 203–208. [62] L. Sun and K. Li, “Adaptive operator selection based on dynamic thompson sampling for MOEA/D,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XVI . Springer International Publishing, 2020, pp. 271– 284. [63] K. Li, ´ A. Fialho, S. Kwong, and Q. Zhang, “Adaptive operator selection with bandits for a multiobjective evolutionary algorithm based on de-composition,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 114–130, 2014. [64] R. Wang, Q. Zhang, and T. Zhang, “Decomposition-based algorithms using Pareto adaptive scalarizing methods,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 821–837, 2016. [65] L. R. C. Farias and A. F. R. Ara´ ujol, “Many-objective evolutionary al-gorithm based on decomposition with random and adaptive weights,” in 

2019 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics ,2019, pp. 3746–3751. [66] F. Ming, W. Gong, L. Wang, and L. Gao, “A constraint-handling tech-nique for decomposition-based constrained many-objective evolutionary algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 7783–7793, 2023. [67] A. B. Ruiz, R. Saborido, and M. Luque, “A preference-based evolution-ary algorithm for multiobjective optimization: the weighting achieve-ment scalarizing function genetic algorithm,” Journal of Global Opti-mization , vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 101–129, 2015. [68] J. Yuan, H.-L. Liu, F. Gu, Q. Zhang, and Z. He, “Investigating the prop-erties of indicators and an evolutionary many-objective algorithm using promising regions,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation ,vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 75–86, 2021. [69] E. Zitzler, D. Brockhoff, and L. Thiele, “The hypervolume indicator revisited: On the design of Pareto-compliant indicators via weighted integration,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 862–876. [70] H. Ge et al. , “A many-objective evolutionary algorithm with two inter-acting processes: Cascade clustering and reference point incremental learning,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 572–586, 2019. [71] P. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Tian, K. C. Tan, and X. Zhang, “A dual model-based evolutionary framework for dynamic large-scale sparse multiobjective optimization,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation ,vol. 97, p. 102011, 2025. [72] Z. He and G. G. Yen, “Many-objective evolutionary algorithms based on coordinated selection strategy,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 220–233, 2017. [73] E. Guerrero-Pe˜ na and A. F. R. Ara´ ujo, “Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm with prediction in the objective space,” Information Sciences ,vol. 501, pp. 293–316, 2019. [74] R. Wang, R. C. Purshouse, and P. J. Fleming, “Preference-inspired co-evolutionary algorithms for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Trans-actions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 474–494, 2013. [75] A. J. Nebro, J. J. Durillo, J. Garcia-Nieto, C. A. Coello Coello, F. Luna, and E. Alba, “SMPSO: A new PSO-based metaheuristic for multi-objective optimization,” in 2009 IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Multi-Criteria Decision-Making , 2009, pp. 66–73. [76] I. Kropp, A. P. Nejadhashemi, and K. Deb, “Improved evolutionary operators for sparse large-scale multiobjective optimization problems,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 460–473, 2024. [77] Y. Zhang, Y. Tian, and X. Zhang, “Improved SparseEA for sparse large-scale multi-objective optimization problems,” Complex & Intelligent Systems , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1127–1142, 2023. [78] G. Liu, Z. Pei, N. Liu, and Y. Tian, “Subspace segmentation based co-evolutionary algorithm for balancing convergence and diversity in many-objective optimization,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , vol. 83, p. 101410, 2023. [79] S. Qi, R. Wang, T. Zhang, X. Yang, R. Sun, and L. Wang, “A two-layer encoding learning swarm optimizer based on frequent itemsets for sparse large-scale multi-objective optimization,” IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 1342–1357, 2024. [80] F. Ming, W. Gong, and L. Wang, “A two-stage evolutionary algorithm with balanced convergence and diversity for many-objective optimiza-tion,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems ,vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 6222–6234, 2022. [81] J. Jiang, F. Han, J. Wang, Q. Ling, H. Han, and Y. Wang, “A two-stage evolutionary algorithm for large-scale sparse multiobjective optimization problems,” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , vol. 72, p. 101093, 2022. [82] H. Wang, L. Jiao, and X. Yao, “Two Arch2: An improved two-archive algorithm for many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evo-lutionary Computation , vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 524–541, 2015. [83] Y. Xiang, Y. Zhou, M. Li, and Z. Chen, “A vector angle-based evolu-tionary algorithm for unconstrained many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 131–152, 2017. [84] T. Robiˇ c and B. Filipiˇ c, “DEMO: Differential evolution for multiob-jective optimization,” in Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3410. Springer, 2005, pp. 520–533. [85] E. Zitzler and S. K¨ unzli, “Indicator-based selection in multiobjective search,” in Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN VIII , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3242. Springer, 2004, pp. 832–842. [86] L. Thiele, K. Miettinen, P. J. Korhonen, and J. Molina, “A preference-based evolutionary algorithm for multi-objective optimization,” Evolu-tionary Computation , vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 411–436, 2009. [87] T. Pamulapati, R. Mallipeddi, and P. N. Suganthan, “ I+ 

> SDE

: An indicator for multi- and many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 346–352, 2019. [88] K. Zhang, C. Shen, and G. G. Yen, “Multipopulation-based differential evolution for large-scale many-objective optimization,” IEEE Transac-tions on Cybernetics , vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 7596–7608, 2023. 16 

[89] F. Goulart and F. Campelo, “Preference-guided evolutionary algorithms for many-objective optimization,” Information Sciences , vol. 329, pp. 236–255, 2016. [90] J. E. Fieldsend and R. M. Everson, “The rolling tide evolutionary algorithm: A multiobjective optimizer for noisy optimization problems,” 

IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 103–117, 2015. [91] K. Deb and J. Sundar, “Reference point based multi-objective optimiza-tion using evolutionary algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation , 2006, pp. 635– 642. 17 

# Semantics-Guided Automatic Tensorization for Multiobjective Evolutionary Algorithms: A Multi-Agent Framework 

Supplementary Document 

I. O VERVIEW 

This supplementary document provides detailed evidence for the five research questions (RQs) concerning the multiobjective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) implementations transformed by Evolutionary Code Conversion (EvoCoCo). Section II reports migration reliability across seven conversion conditions, including complete attempt-level outcomes, failure stages, backend comparisons, token use, benchmark taxonomy, and provenance. Section III reports optimization-fidelity results across DTLZ, WFG, LSMOP, and MaF. Section IV reports population- and dimension-scaling results, including complete curves and exception records. Section V reports transfer to external and legacy MATLAB/Octave implementations. Section VI reports the component-ablation results. All PlatEMO source and reference implementations used in the main benchmark are from PlatEMO v4.14. The experiments use the same two hardware environments reported in the main paper. The migration-reliability, external-transfer, and ablation experiments were conducted locally under Windows 11 on a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5060 Ti graphics processing unit (GPU) with 16 GB of GPU memory and an Intel Core Ultra 7 265K central processing unit (CPU). The optimization-fidelity and computational-scalability experiments were conducted on a server equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of GPU memory and an AMD EPYC 7543 CPU. This supplementary document reports the complete evidence behind the compact main-paper results and introduces no additional post hoc repair or reselection of the 48 tensorized implementations used in the fidelity and scaling studies. 

> TABLE S.I NAVIGATION OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENT AND THE CORRESPONDING MAIN -PAPER QUESTIONS .

Section Detailed content Main-paper question II Migration outcomes, failure stages, source taxonomy, token use, back-end comparisons RQ1: Migration reliability III Suite-, problem-, and MOEA-level fidelity results, invalid references, and tolerance sensitivity RQ2: Optimization fidelity IV Aggregate and complete population/dimension scaling results, time-outs, errors, and out-of-memory cases RQ3: Computational scalability V Matched migration results for external and legacy MATLAB/Octave implementations RQ4: Transfer VI Blueprint, repair, rule-retrieval, and multi-branch ablations RQ5: Component contributions 

II. D ETAILED MIGRATION -R ELIABILITY RESULTS 

A. Detailed Migration Configuration and Batch Inclusion 

The migration benchmark evaluates automatic tensorization from heterogeneous PlatEMO implementations to EvoX. The attempt-level experimental unit is the final EvoX implementation returned by one conversion attempt. Each of the seven conditions contains five independent attempts for each of 48 source MOEA implementations, which yields 48 × 5 = 240 

attempt-level implementations. The reasoning-effort setting is left at the provider default for GLM-5.1, set to minimal for both Gemini 3 Flash conditions, and set to low for all DeepSeek V4 conditions. The two generation modes differ in transformation structure. One-shot generation returns one candidate directly from the supplied source context. EvoCoCo instead performs source analysis, rule retrieval, blueprint construction, generation through six strategy-guided branches, validation, execution-guided repair, and final selection. Within each EvoCoCo attempt, the six branch candidates are reduced to one attempt-level output by the hierarchical selection procedure described in the main paper. The branch strategies emphasize broadcasting, einsum optimization, masked operations, in-place efficiency, advanced tensor operations, and tensorized iterative selection. All generated implementations are validated on DTLZ2 with N = 100 , M = 3 , D = 12 , and 100 generations, subject to a 60-s time limit. A candidate is converged when it executes without persistent NaNs and its final inverted generational distance (IGD) is below 0.25. Conditional IGD uses converged records with finite final IGD, and conditional runtime uses converged records with nonnegative execution time. For the downstream fidelity and scaling studies, the five attempt-level outputs produced by EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash for each MOEA are compared using the same hierarchical evidence order, and the best converged attempt-level output is fixed before downstream benchmark evaluation. 18 

TABLE S.II MIGRATION -RELIABILITY CONFIGURATIONS FOR THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS , INCLUDING MODEL REASONING -EFFORT SETTINGS AND RETAINED GENERATION METADATA . E ACH CONDITION COMPRISES 240 INDEPENDENT CONVERSION ATTEMPTS .

Method Branches Reasoning effort and execution metadata Records GLM-5.1 one-shot 1 Provider default; detailed reasoning metadata not retained 240 DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 1 low 240 DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 1 low 240 Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 1 minimal 240 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 6 low 240 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 6 low ; five repeats concurrent and at most 30 branches active 240 EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 6 minimal 240 

B. Benchmark Composition, Taxonomy, and Algorithm Provenance 

The benchmark contains PlatEMO implementations of 48 source MOEAs. For a compact and mutually exclusive taxonomy, each algorithm is assigned to one of four classes according to its primary environmental-selection or population-update mechanism: dominance-based, decomposition-based, indicator-based, or specialized-operator-based. Hybrid algorithms are assigned to the mechanism that most directly determines survival or population updating, while the detailed mechanism column records important secondary components and target problem settings. Table S.III reports this taxonomy together with the original publication associated with every source algorithm. 

TABLE S.III TAXONOMY , P RIMARY MECHANISMS , AND SOURCE PUBLICATIONS OF THE 48 B ENCHMARK ALGORITHMS .

Class Algorithm Detailed mechanism Reference Dominance-based AGE-MOEA Combines nondominated sorting with adaptive Lp-geometry estimates for proximity–diversity survival scores. [44] Dominance-based BiGE Maps proximity and crowding to a bi-goal space and applies nondominated sorting in that space. [45] Dominance-based e-MOEA Uses epsilon-dominance for steady-state replacement and maintenance of a bounded external archive. [46] Dominance-based GDE3 Combines differential-evolution variation with Pareto dominance and crowding-based truncation. [47] Dominance-based GrEA Uses nondominated sorting followed by grid rank, grid crowding, and grid-dominance criteria. [48] Dominance-based KnEA Uses nondominated fronts, adaptive knee-point identification, and distance-based last-front truncation. [49] Dominance-based NSBiDiCo Combines nondominated sorting with bidirectional differential coevolution for population up-dating. [50] Dominance-based NSGA-II-SDR Replaces standard Pareto comparison with a strengthened dominance relation encoding conver-gence and diversity. [51] Dominance-based PESA-II Maintains a nondominated archive and selects sparsely occupied objective-space hyperboxes. [52] Dominance-based SPEA-R Uses strength-Pareto fitness and reference directions to balance convergence and population spread. [53] Dominance-based t-DEA Uses theta-dominance within reference-vector clusters to rank many-objective solutions. [54] Decomposition-based BCE-MOEA-D Couples MOEA/D subproblems with a Pareto bi-criterion to balance convergence and diversity. [55] Decomposition-based EFR-RR Ranks solutions by ensemble aggregation functions and restricts ranking through weight-vector niches. [56] Decomposition-based GWASF-GA Uses multiple global weighting achievement scalarizing functions to approximate the complete Pareto front. [57] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-AWA Adapts weight vectors online when the population distribution becomes imbalanced. [58] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-DCWV Controls the distribution of weight vectors to better match the current Pareto-front geometry. [59] Decomposition-based MOEA/D-DE Optimizes weighted subproblems through neighborhood replacement and differential-evolution variation. [60] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-DRA Dynamically allocates search effort among subproblems according to their recent utility. [61] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-DU Combines aggregation-based convergence with perpendicular-distance diversity updating. [56] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-DYTS Selects variation operators for decomposed subproblems through dynamic Thompson sampling. [62] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-FRRMAB Uses fitness-rate-rank credit and a multi-armed bandit to select differential-evolution operators. [63] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-PaS Learns Pareto-adaptive scalarizing methods for Pareto fronts with different geometries. [64] Decomposition-based MOEA-D-URAW Combines random initial weights with online adaptive weight addition and deletion. [65] Decomposition-based tDEA-CPBI Uses reference-vector decomposition with a constrained penalty-boundary-intersection criterion. [66] Decomposition-based WASF-GA Uses achievement scalarizing functions centered on preference reference points. [67] Indicator-based BCE-IBEA Uses indicator fitness inside bi-criterion environmental selection to balance Pareto and non-Pareto criteria. [55] Indicator-based PREA Defines pairwise indicator fitness, identifies promising regions, and iteratively removes crowded candidates. [68] Indicator-based SIBEA Uses a binary weighted-hypervolume indicator for Pareto-compliant fitness assignment. [69] Specialized operator CLIA Combines cascade clustering with incremental reference-point learning to adapt environmental-selection niches. [70] Specialized operator CMOEA-MS Balances objective progress and constraint satisfaction using constraint-aware fitness and density estimation. [21] Specialized operator CMOPSO Uses competitive swarm learning, leader competition, and particle-velocity updates. [23] Specialized operator CoMMEA Coevolves convergence- and diversity-oriented populations for multimodal Pareto sets. [22] Specialized operator DM-MOEA Uses dual models to respond to changes and exploit sparse variables in dynamic large-scale problems. [71] Specialized operator LSMOF Reformulates a high-dimensional decision problem into lower-dimensional search components. [25] Continued on next page 19 

TABLE S.III (Continued) TAXONOMY , P RIMARY MECHANISMS , AND SOURCE PUBLICATIONS OF THE 48 B ENCHMARK ALGORITHMS .

Class Algorithm Detailed mechanism Reference Specialized operator MaOEA-CSS Coordinates complementary convergence- and diversity-oriented selection strategies. [72] Specialized operator OSP-NSDE Uses objective-space prediction to guide offspring generation within a nondominated-sorting DE framework. [73] Specialized operator PICEA-g Coevolves candidate solutions and goal vectors, rewarding solutions that satisfy relatively rare goals. [74] Specialized operator SMPSO Uses speed-constrained particle updates, mutation, and a nondominated external archive. [75] Specialized operator S-NSGA-II Adds sparse-problem-specific crossover and mutation operators to the NSGA-II framework. [76] Specialized operator SparseEA Scores decision-variable activation patterns and applies sparsity-oriented variation. [26] Specialized operator SparseEA2 Refines variable scoring and sparse variation to improve convergence and scalability. [77] Specialized operator SSCEA Segments the search space into subspaces and coevolves subpopulations for convergence and diversity. [78] Specialized operator TELSO Uses two-layer encoding and frequent-itemset learning for sparse large-scale swarm search. [79] Specialized operator TS-NSGA-II Switches between stage-wise convergence and diversity selection mechanisms during many-objective search. [80] Specialized operator TS-SparseEA Separates sparse-pattern discovery and solution refinement into two evolutionary stages. [81] Specialized operator Two Arch2 Maintains separate convergence and diversity archives with restricted mating and archive-specific updates. [82] Specialized operator VaEA Uses vector-angle niching and angle-based elimination to preserve directional diversity. [83] Specialized operator WOF Reformulates large-scale problems through weight-based decision-variable transformation. [24] 

The taxonomy contains 11 dominance-based, 14 decomposition-based, 3 indicator-based, and 20 specialized-operator-based algorithms. The 48 algorithm labels correspond to 46 unique publications. BCE-IBEA and BCE-MOEA-D originate from the same bi-criterion evolution study, while EFR-RR and MOEA-D-DU originate from the same decomposition-based many-objective study. 

C. Failure-Stage Decomposition 

The four outcome categories in Table S.IV are mutually exclusive and sum to 240 within each condition. An execution failure is syntactically valid code that does not complete execution; a convergence failure is executable code that does not meet the final-IGD criterion. 

TABLE S.IV MIGRATION RESULTS ACROSS THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS , CLASSIFIED BY THE EARLIEST UNSUCCESSFUL EVALUATION STAGE . C OUNTS AND PERCENTAGES ARE COMPUTED OVER 240 ATTEMPTS PER CONDITION .

Method Syntax failure Execution failure Convergence failure Converged GLM-5.1 one-shot 1 (0.42%) 64 (26.67%) 27 (11.25%) 148 (61.67%) DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 0 156 (65.00%) 19 (7.92%) 65 (27.08%) Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 0 151 (62.92%) 25 (10.42%) 64 (26.67%) DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 0 177 (73.75%) 23 (9.58%) 40 (16.67%) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 7 (2.92%) 42 (17.50%) 48 (20.00%) 143 (59.58%) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 2 (0.83%) 35 (14.58%) 46 (19.17%) 157 (65.42%) EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 0 16 (6.67%) 35 (14.58%) 189 (78.75%) 20 0 20 40 60 80 100 

Share of generated programs (%) 

GLM-5.1 one-shot DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot Gemini 3 Flash one-shot DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 26.7 65.0 62.9 73.8 17.5 14.6 11.2 7.9 10.4 9.6 20.0 19.2 14.6 61.7 27.1 26.7 16.7 59.6 65.4 78.8 Syntax failure Execution failure Convergence failure Converged: one-shot Converged: EvoCoCo 

Fig. S.1. Stage-wise distribution of migration results across the seven experimental conditions. Each condition comprises 240 conversion attempts. Patterned segments denote unsuccessful stages, while blue and coral denote converged one-shot and EvoCoCo attempts, respectively. 

Execution-stage failures account for 62.92%–73.75% of the three backend-matched one-shot conditions, compared with 6.67%–17.50% under EvoCoCo. More EvoCoCo candidates therefore reach optimization evaluation. The larger convergence-failure segment under some EvoCoCo conditions should be interpreted together with the substantial expansion of the converged segment, rather than as standalone evidence of reduced optimization fidelity. 

D. Algorithm-Level Stability and Paired Comparisons 

Table S.V reports how many algorithms achieve exactly zero through five converged attempts. EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash is the only condition with no 0/5 algorithm and reaches 5/5 convergence on 19 algorithms. 

TABLE S.V ALGORITHM -LEVEL DISTRIBUTION OF CONVERGENCE COUNTS ACROSS FIVE ATTEMPTS PER CONDITION . E ACH ROW ACCOUNTS FOR ALL 48 

> BENCHMARK ALGORITHMS

.                                                

> Method 0/5 1/5 2/5 3/5 4/5 5/5 GLM-5.1 one-shot 3410 10 11 10 DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 16 17 4470Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 23 10 4254DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 24 14 6220EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 17617 12 5EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 266913 12 EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 01411 13 19

An algorithm is a win when the left method has more converged attempts than the right method, a loss when it has fewer, and a tie when the counts are equal. The exploratory two-sided sign test discards ties and treats algorithms as paired units. Holm adjustment is applied across the eight comparisons in Table S.VI. 21 

TABLE S.VI PAIRED ALGORITHM -LEVEL COMPARISONS OF CONVERGENCE COUNTS ACROSS FIVE ATTEMPTS PER ALGORITHM . W IN /TIE /LOSS COUNTS ARE ACCOMPANIED BY TWO -SIDED SIGN -TEST p-VALUES BEFORE AND AFTER HOLM CORRECTION .

Left method Right method W/T/L Added conv. Raw p Holm p

EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 38/3/7 +125 3.12 × 10 −6 1.87 × 10 −5

EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 35/9/4 +92 3.35 × 10 −7 2.35 × 10 −6

EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 43/3/2 +103 5.89 × 10 −11 4.71 × 10 −10 

EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) GLM-5.1 one-shot 27/9/12 +41 0.0237 0.1185 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) GLM-5.1 one-shot 16/16/16 +9 1.0000 1.0000 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) GLM-5.1 one-shot 18/12/18 −5 1.0000 1.0000 EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 24/11/13 +32 0.0989 0.3955 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 21/14/13 +14 0.2295 0.6884 

The tests quantify directional consistency at the algorithm level. They do not establish a causal pipeline effect because model versions, reasoning behavior, concurrency, and worker settings were not fully controlled across batches. 

E. Conditional Quality, Runtime, and Token Use 

IGD and benchmark runtime in Table S.VII are computed over converged runs only. They describe the quality and execution time of the successful subset, not end-to-end migration reliability. 

TABLE S.VII OPTIMIZATION QUALITY AND RUNTIME AMONG CONVERGED MIGRATION ATTEMPTS . IGD AND RUNTIME STATISTICS ARE COMPUTED ONLY OVER CONVERGED ATTEMPTS .

Method Conv. Mean IGD Median IGD Mean time (s) Median time (s) GLM-5.1 one-shot 148 0.07817 0.07347 3.59 1.76 DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 65 0.08242 0.07826 2.81 1.16 Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 64 0.09500 0.07304 8.71 4.28 DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 40 0.08276 0.07431 2.13 0.59 

EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 143 0.09849 0.08299 6.34 1.38 EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 157 0.09412 0.07928 2.99 0.67 EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 189 0.08611 0.07477 3.86 1.63 

Token use measures large language model (LLM) generation resources and is separate from benchmark execution time. Provider-reported reasoning tokens are included within completion tokens rather than added again. Because provider prices, cache accounting, and source completeness differ across batches, monetary cost is not compared here. 

TABLE S.VIII LLM TOKEN CONSUMPTION ACROSS THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS , REPORTED IN TOTAL , PER CONVERSION ATTEMPT , AND PER CONVERGED ATTEMPT .

Method Total tokens Per attempt Per converged result GLM-5.1 one-shot 11,308,504 47.1k 76.4k DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot 3,692,224 15.4k 56.8k Gemini 3 Flash one-shot 1,811,231 7.5k 28.3k 

DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot 3,876,583 16.2k 96.9k EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) 101,165,726 421.5k 707.5k EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) 103,274,934 430.3k 657.8k EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) 53,725,242 223.9k 284.3k 

The one-shot conditions use fewer tokens, whereas EvoCoCo attains higher reliability and coverage. For example, EvoCoCo with Gemini 3 Flash uses about ten times more tokens per converged result than its one-shot counterpart but expands convergence from 64 to 189 runs and coverage from 25 to 48 algorithms. Token efficiency therefore exposes a resource–reliability trade-off rather than a standalone migration-quality ranking. 

F. Algorithm-Level Outcomes and Backend Heterogeneity 

Figure S.2 orders the 48 algorithms by their combined number of converged runs under the three EvoCoCo backends. The backend effect is algorithm dependent rather than a uniform shift. SIBEA, GrEA, SSCEA, and TELSO remain difficult across backends, while CMOEA-MS, EFR-RR, MOEA-D-DU, and PICEA-g converge in all 15 attempts. Gemini 3 Flash avoids every 0/5 result; DeepSeek V4 Pro has no convergence on SSCEA and TELSO, and DeepSeek V4 Flash has none on SIBEA. 22 DeepSeek V4 Flash DeepSeek V4 Pro Gemini 3 Flash 

SIBEA GrEA SSCEA TELSO PREA Two_Arch2 BCE-MOEA-D TS-SparseEA BCE-IBEA NSGA-II-SDR SparseEA tDEA-CPBI CLIA MaOEA-CSS MOEA-D-PaS t-DEA TS-NSGA-II VaEA AGE-MOEA MOEA-D-FRRMAB MOEA/D-DE DM-MOEA LSMOF MOEA-D-URAW 

0 1 21 2 11 0 31 0 31 2 31 1 43 1 32 2 32 1 5

1 2 5

2 4 34 2 33 1 5

3 1 5

2 4 43 3 43 4 33 4 33 5 23 2 5

1 5 44 3 43 4 43 4 4

DeepSeek V4 Flash DeepSeek V4 Pro Gemini 3 Flash 

NSBiDiCo PESA-II S-NSGA-II WOF KnEA MOEA-D-AWA OSP-NSDE SMPSO SparseEA2 SPEA-R WASF-GA CMOPSO BiGE GDE3 GWASF-GA MOEA-D-DCWV CoMMEA e-MOEA MOEA-D-DRA MOEA-D-DYTS CMOEA-MS EFR-RR MOEA-D-DU PICEA-g 

4 4 34 4 33 4 43 4 42 4 5

2 5 43 3 5

4 5 23 3 5

4 5 23 3 5

4 4 43 5 44 3 5

4 3 5

4 3 5

4 4 55 3 5

4 5 43 5 55 5 55 5 55 5 55 5 5

0 1 2 3 4 5

Converged runs (of 5) 

Fig. S.2. Backend-specific convergence performance of EvoCoCo across the 48 benchmark algorithms. Each cell reports the number of converged attempts out of five; algorithms are ordered by total convergence across the three model backends. 

The complete algorithm-level execution/convergence matrix is reported in Table S.IX. Each entry is E/C , where E and C

are the numbers of executable and converged implementations among five attempts. 

TABLE S.IX ALGORITHM -L EVEL MIGRATION RESULTS ACROSS THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS .

Algorithm GLM-5.1 one-shot DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot Gemini 3 Flash one-shot DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) AGE-MOEA 2/2 4/4 1/1 1/1 3/3 5/5 4/2 BCE-IBEA 5/3 0/0 2/0 0/0 5/2 4/1 5/5 BCE-MOEA-D 4/4 0/0 0/0 0/0 3/3 2/1 4/3 BiGE 5/5 2/1 1/1 2/1 3/3 5/5 5/4 CLIA 2/2 1/1 0/0 0/0 5/3 2/1 5/5 CMOEA-MS 4/3 1/1 5/2 1/1 5/5 5/5 5/5 CMOPSO 4/4 4/4 1/1 2/2 4/4 4/4 4/4 CoMMEA 5/4 0/0 1/0 1/1 5/4 5/4 5/5 DM-MOEA 4/4 0/0 3/3 1/0 5/4 4/3 4/4 EFR-RR 5/4 1/1 0/0 2/1 5/5 5/5 5/5 Continued on next page 23 

TABLE S.IX (Continued) ALGORITHM -L EVEL MIGRATION RESULTS ACROSS THE SEVEN EXPERIMENTAL CONDITIONS .

Algorithm GLM-5.1 one-shot DeepSeek V4 Pro one-shot Gemini 3 Flash one-shot DeepSeek V4 Flash one-shot EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Flash) EvoCoCo (DeepSeek V4 Pro) EvoCoCo (Gemini 3 Flash) e-MOEA 4/4 2/2 0/0 1/1 5/5 5/3 5/5 GDE3 4/4 5/4 1/1 4/4 4/4 5/3 5/5 GrEA 4/3 1/1 3/2 2/0 1/1 4/2 5/1 GWASF-GA 3/3 4/4 2/1 4/2 5/4 4/3 5/5 KnEA 2/1 1/1 5/5 0/0 2/2 5/4 5/5 LSMOF 4/4 1/1 1/1 0/0 3/3 4/4 4/4 MaOEA-CSS 5/5 4/4 5/5 4/4 3/3 5/1 5/5 MOEA-D-AWA 2/2 0/0 0/0 0/0 4/2 5/5 4/4 MOEA-D-DCWV 1/1 1/1 0/0 0/0 5/4 5/3 5/5 MOEA/D-DE 3/3 3/3 0/0 2/1 5/1 5/5 5/4 MOEA-D-DRA 2/2 3/2 0/0 1/1 4/4 5/5 4/4 MOEA-D-DU 3/3 0/0 3/3 0/0 5/5 5/5 5/5 MOEA-D-DYTS 5/5 2/1 0/0 1/1 5/3 5/5 5/5 MOEA-D-FRRMAB 2/2 0/0 2/2 0/0 3/3 4/2 5/5 MOEA-D-PaS 2/2 2/1 0/0 0/0 5/2 4/4 5/4 MOEA-D-URAW 4/4 1/1 0/0 0/0 3/3 5/4 4/4 NSBiDiCo 2/2 1/1 0/0 1/1 4/4 4/4 4/3 NSGA-II-SDR 5/1 1/0 4/0 2/0 3/1 3/2 5/5 OSP-NSDE 3/3 4/3 0/0 1/1 3/3 3/3 5/5 PESA-II 4/4 4/4 5/5 1/1 5/4 4/4 4/3 PICEA-g 3/3 3/3 1/1 3/3 5/5 5/5 5/5 PREA 5/5 4/4 4/4 2/1 5/1 5/2 5/3 SIBEA 2/2 1/1 3/0 2/2 0/0 1/1 2/2 SMPSO 5/5 1/1 5/5 3/3 5/4 5/5 5/2 S-NSGA-II 5/5 2/2 4/4 2/2 5/3 5/4 5/4 SparseEA 5/5 2/1 1/1 0/0 3/2 5/4 5/3 SparseEA2 3/3 0/0 1/1 0/0 5/3 3/3 5/5 SPEA-R 3/3 1/0 4/1 1/0 5/4 5/5 4/2 SSCEA 2/0 0/0 0/0 2/0 3/1 4/0 4/3 t-DEA 4/4 3/3 0/0 0/0 3/3 3/3 5/4 tDEA-CPBI 5/5 1/1 0/0 2/2 4/4 2/2 5/3 TELSO 3/0 2/0 0/0 0/0 5/1 4/0 5/3 TS-NSGA-II 5/2 0/0 4/4 1/0 4/3 5/4 5/3 TS-SparseEA 4/2 1/0 5/4 0/0 3/2 4/2 5/3 Two Arch2 4/1 2/1 1/0 3/0 5/1 5/1 4/4 VaEA 5/5 4/2 4/4 3/1 4/3 4/4 5/3 WASF-GA 3/0 4/0 5/0 3/0 4/3 4/3 5/5 WOF 5/5 0/0 2/2 2/2 3/3 4/4 5/4 

G. Failure Analysis 

Across the three EvoCoCo conditions, the numbers of non-converged candidates are 97 for DeepSeek V4 Flash, 83 for DeepSeek V4 Pro, and 51 for Gemini 3 Flash. All 129 convergence-stage failures produce a finite final IGD above 0.25. These cases therefore represent optimization-behavior failures rather than missing application programming interface (API) or runtime failures. The raw backend ranking is consistent for both executability and convergence, although algorithm-level contrasts remain substantial. The DeepSeek V4 Flash batch retains a single-worker retry with exception traces. Serial retry recovers 23 of the 42 raw execution failures and eight converged runs. This recovery shows that part of the raw failure count is sensitive to concurrent execution. The remaining 19 reproducible execution failures are summarized in Table S.X. This retry is a sensitivity analysis and is not used in the main comparison because the other backends were not subjected to the same policy. 

TABLE S.X REPRODUCIBLE EXECUTION -FAILURE CATEGORIES FOR THE 19 D EEP SEEK V4 F LASH ATTEMPTS THAT REMAINED UNSUCCESSFUL UNDER SINGLE -WORKER SERIAL VERIFICATION .

Failure type Count Representative cause Unsupported Boolean argmax 5 torch.argmax called on a Boolean tensor GPU index/device assertion 3 Invalid scatter, gather, or index values Indexed-assignment dtype mismatch 3 Incompatible integer or floating tensor dtypes Tensor shape mismatch 2 Operations combine incompatible dimensions Selection-API argument mismatch 2 Integer passed where a tensor list is required Tuple return treated as tensor 2 Tuple used with tensor operations or methods Missing API/import 1 hypervolume unavailable from installed package Singular linear system 1 torch.linalg.solve receives a singular matrix 

These errors separate into API-contract failures, tensor-contract failures, and numerical-robustness failures. The first two groups account for 18 of the 19 reproducible failures. This distribution indicates that API awareness and tensor-contract validation are more important for these cases than additional syntax-only checks. The DeepSeek V4 Pro and Gemini 3 Flash batches do not retain comparable per-run stderr traces, so their execution failures cannot be assigned defensibly to the same concrete categories. 24 

III. D ETAILED OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY RESULTS 

This section reports the optimization-fidelity results for the 48 tensorized implementations on DTLZ1–DTLZ7, WFG1– WFG9, LSMOP1–LSMOP9, and MaF1–MaF15. For every algorithm–problem combination, EvoX and PlatEMO are each evaluated in 21 independent runs with population size N = 100 and a budget of 100 generations. The two frameworks use the same problem definitions, objective and decision dimensions, variable bounds, population sizes, and generation budgets. Final IGD is the primary endpoint, and classification uses the arithmetic mean of the 21 final IGD values. A combination is Improved when EvoX is no worse than PlatEMO and Preserved when its positive degradation satisfies either an absolute IGD tolerance of 0.10 or a relative IGD tolerance of 200%. Other finite comparisons are labeled IGD degradation . A combination is labeled Reference invalid when the PlatEMO implementation does not provide the required number of usable reference runs. Among the 1,920 algorithm–problem combinations, 16 PlatEMO references are invalid. The remaining 1,904 valid comparisons contain 724 Improved, 956 Preserved, and 224 IGD-degradation outcomes. Thus, 1,680 valid comparisons satisfy the fidelity criterion, which yields an overall fidelity coverage of 88.2%. At the algorithm level, 41 of the 48 tensorized implementations achieve at least 80% fidelity coverage over their valid reference problems. Therefore, 85.4% of the benchmark MOEAs satisfy the algorithm-level coverage criterion. 

A. Problem Configuration 

All recorded EvoX and PlatEMO problem groups use three objectives. MaF8–MaF9 therefore use the experiment’s explicit 

M = 3 setting rather than the PlatEMO class default of 10. The confirmed DTLZ7 setting is D = 22 , matching D = M + 19 

for M = 3 . The decision dimensions and variable bounds used in the matched runs are listed in Table S.XI. 

TABLE S.XI MATCHED PROBLEM CONFIGURATIONS FOR THE OPTIMIZATION -FIDELITY EXPERIMENT , INCLUDING DECISION DIMENSIONS AND VARIABLE BOUNDS FOR EACH BENCHMARK SUITE .                                                                    

> Problems MDLower bound Upper bound DTLZ1 3701
> DTLZ2–DTLZ6 312 01
> DTLZ7 322 01
> WFG1–WFG9 312 0[2 ,4, . . . , 24]
> LSMOP1–LSMOP9 3300 0[1 ,1,10 , . . . , 10]
> MaF1–MaF6 312 01
> MaF7 322 01
> MaF8–MaF9 32[−10 4,−10 4][10 4,10 4]
> MaF10–MaF12 312 0[2 ,4, . . . , 24]
> MaF13 35[0 ,0,−2,−2,−2] [1 ,1,2,2,2]
> MaF14–MaF15 360 0[1 ,1,10 , . . . , 10]

B. Suite-Level Results 

TABLE S.XII OVERALL AND SUITE -LEVEL OPTIMIZATION -FIDELITY RESULTS ACROSS THE DTLZ, WFG, LSMOP, AND MAF BENCHMARK SUITES . C OVERAGE DENOTES THE PROPORTION OF VALID PLAT EMO REFERENCES CLASSIFIED AS IMPROVED OR PRESERVED .                                                

> Suite All Valid Improved Preserved IGD degr. Ref. invalid Passes Coverage DTLZ 336 332 141 138 53 4279 84.0% WFG 432 429 161 253 15 3414 96.5% LSMOP 432 427 149 213 65 5362 84.8% MaF 720 716 273 352 91 4625 87.3%
> Overall 1920 1904 724 956 224 16 1680 88.2%

25 DTLZ1 DTLZ2 DTLZ3 DTLZ4 DTLZ5 DTLZ6 DTLZ7 

> 68.8 95.8 85.4 93.6 95.7 59.6 89.6

DTLZ 

WFG1 WFG2 WFG3 WFG4 WFG5 WFG6 WFG7 WFG8 WFG9 

> 100.0 97.9 91.5 97.9 95.8 97.9 95.7 95.8 95.7

WFG 

0 20 40 60 80 100 LSMOP1 LSMOP2 LSMOP3 LSMOP4 LSMOP5 LSMOP6 LSMOP7 LSMOP8 LSMOP9 

> 91.5 93.6 91.5 100.0 83.3 52.1 66.7 91.7 93.6

LSMOP 

0 20 40 60 80 100 MaF1 MaF2 MaF3 MaF4 MaF5 MaF6 MaF7 MaF8 MaF9 MaF10 MaF11 MaF12 MaF13 MaF14 MaF15 

> 97.9 97.9 62.5 93.8 91.5 41.7 85.4 89.6 79.2 100.0 97.9 95.7 93.8 91.5 91.7

MaF 

Fidelity coverage across valid comparisons (%) 

Fig. S.3. Problem-level optimization-fidelity coverage across the DTLZ, WFG, LSMOP, and MaF benchmark suites. Dark-blue and pale-blue bars indicate coverage above and below the 80% reference level, respectively; Reference-invalid cases are excluded. 

Figure S.3 summarizes problem-level coverage, while the four outcome matrices below retain every algorithm–problem classification and each algorithm’s suite-specific pass count. These views provide the complete categorical evidence without repeating it in separate problem- and algorithm-level summary tables. 

C. Invalid PlatEMO References 

Among the 16 reference-invalid combinations, nine are caused by PlatEMO timeouts for SIBEA on DTLZ5, DTLZ6, WFG3, WFG7, WFG9, LSMOP2, LSMOP4, MaF2, and MaF12. The remaining seven arise from PlatEMO execution errors: OSP-NSDE on DTLZ4 and MaF5, CLIA on DTLZ5 and LSMOP9, and TELSO on LSMOP1, LSMOP3, and MaF14. These cases are reported for completeness but are excluded from all effective coverage denominators. 26 

D. Tolerance Sensitivity 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 

Relative IGD tolerance (%) 

0.05 0.075 0.08 0.09 0.1 0.12 0.15 0.2                                                 

> Absolute IGD tolerance
> 85.1 86.6 87.6 88.4 88.7 89.3 89.9 85.3 86.7 87.7 88.5 88.8 89.4 90.0 85.5 86.9 87.9 88.7 89.0 89.5 90.1 85.6 87.0 88.0 88.8 89.1 89.6 90.2 85.9 87.2 88.2 89.0 89.3 89.8 90.4 86.0 87.3 88.3 89.1 89.4 89.9 90.5 86.2 87.5 88.4 89.2 89.5 90.0 90.6 86.5 87.7 88.6 89.3 89.7 90.1 90.8

Effective fidelity coverage under nearby tolerance settings 

85 86 87 88 89 90 91 

> Overall fidelity coverage (%)

Fig. S.4. Sensitivity of overall optimization-fidelity coverage to the absolute and relative IGD tolerances. The outlined cell denotes the selected setting of 0.10 and 200%, respectively. 

The selected rule lies inside a stable neighborhood: the overall coverage changes gradually as either tolerance is varied, rather than jumping at the selected cell. The chosen setting therefore provides a transparent practical threshold without relying on a narrow, data-specific discontinuity. 

E. Representative Convergence Trajectories 

Each convergence curve reports the checkpoint-wise arithmetic mean over 21 independent runs, with a band of plus or minus one sample standard deviation. The recorded trajectories contain 101 IGD checkpoints but no checkpoint-level timestamps. The displayed time coordinate is therefore obtained by mapping the normalized checkpoint index linearly to the median total runtime of the corresponding algorithm–problem combination and should be interpreted as an approximate wall-clock scale rather than instrumented per-generation timing. Figure S.5 presents 16 representative trajectories selected from combinations classified as Improved or Preserved . The four algorithms each have at least 95% overall effective coverage and contribute one trajectory from every benchmark suite. Combinations classified as IGD degradation are omitted so that the figure focuses on fidelity-preserving convergence behavior. 27 0 1 2 3 4 5

Time (s) 

> 10 1
> 10 2
> Mean IGD

t-DEA — DTLZ3 0 2 4 6

Time (s) 

> 2 × 10 −1
> 3 × 10 −1
> 4 × 10 −1
> 6 × 10 −1
> Mean IGD

t-DEA — WFG3 0 2 4 6 8

Time (s) 

> 10 3
> 10 4
> Mean IGD

t-DEA — LSMOP6 0 2 4 6

Time (s) 

> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean IGD

t-DEA — MaF6 0 5 10 15 

Time (s) 

> 10 1
> 10 2
> Mean IGD

Two_Arch2 — DTLZ3 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 

Time (s) 

> 10 −1
> Mean IGD

Two_Arch2 — WFG3 0 5 10 15 

Time (s) 

> 10 3
> 10 4
> Mean IGD

Two_Arch2 — LSMOP6 0 2 4 6 8 10 

Time (s) 

> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean IGD

Two_Arch2 — MaF6 0 2 4 6 8

Time (s) 

> 10 2
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-DU — DTLZ3 0 2 4 6 8

Time (s) 

> 3 × 10 −1
> 4 × 10 −1
> 6 × 10 −1
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-DU — WFG3 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 

Time (s) 

> 10 4
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-DU — LSMOP6 0 2 4 6

Time (s) 

> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-DU — MaF6 0 10 20 30 40 

Time (s) 

> 10 1
> 10 2
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-URAW — DTLZ3 0 5 10 15 

Time (s) 

> 10 −1
> 2 × 10 −1
> 3 × 10 −1
> 4 × 10 −1
> 6 × 10 −1
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-URAW — WFG3 0 20 40 

Time (s) 

> 10 3
> 10 4
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-URAW — LSMOP6 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 

Time (s) 

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Mean IGD

MOEA-D-URAW — MaF6 

Fig. S.5. Representative convergence trajectories for four algorithms with at least 95% effective optimization-fidelity coverage. Rows correspond to t-DEA, Two Arch2, MOEA-D-DU, and MOEA-D-URAW; columns correspond to DTLZ3, WFG3, LSMOP6, and MaF6. All displayed combinations are classified as Improved or Preserved. The horizontal axes are approximate wall-clock scales obtained by mapping checkpoint index to the median total runtime. 28 

F. Complete Algorithm–Problem Outcome Matrices 

The five portrait matrices below retain all 1,920 algorithm–problem classifications while avoiding 40 repetitions of the same table structure. DTLZ, WFG, and LSMOP are each shown in one matrix; the wider MaF suite is divided into two column blocks with the same algorithm order. Each cell applies the arithmetic-mean rule defined above. The final three columns in the second MaF block report full-suite passed comparisons, valid references, and coverage. The 16 X cases and their exclusion reasons are described above. 

Cell legend: I Improved; P Preserved; D IGD degradation; X Reference invalid. Letter codes remain visible in grayscale and do not rely on color alone. 

TABLE S.XIII OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY OUTCOME MATRIX FOR THE DTLZ S UITE .

Algorithm DTLZ1 DTLZ2 DTLZ3 DTLZ4 DTLZ5 DTLZ6 DTLZ7 Pass Valid Coverage AGE-MOEA D P P D P P P 5 7 71.4% BCE-IBEA D P P P P P I 6 7 85.7% BCE-MOEA-D D P D P P D P 4 7 57.1% BiGE D I P I P I P 6 7 85.7% CLIA P P P I X D P 5 6 83.3% CMOEA-MS D P P I I D P 5 7 71.4% CMOPSO I P I P P I I 7 7 100.0% CoMMEA I I I I I I I 7 7 100.0% DM-MOEA D I P I I P P 6 7 85.7% e-MOEA I P I I I P I 7 7 100.0% EFR-RR I I I I P P P 7 7 100.0% GDE3 I I P I I I I 7 7 100.0% GrEA P P P I P P P 7 7 100.0% GWASF-GA D I D I P D P 4 7 57.1% KnEA D I P I I P D 5 7 71.4% LSMOF I I I I I I I 7 7 100.0% MaOEA-CSS P D I D P D D 3 7 42.9% MOEA-D-AWA D P P I P D P 5 7 71.4% MOEA-D-DCWV P P I P P D I 6 7 85.7% MOEA/D-DE P P P D P D P 5 7 71.4% MOEA-D-DRA I I I I P I P 7 7 100.0% MOEA-D-DU P P P P P P I 7 7 100.0% MOEA-D-DYTS I I P I P P I 7 7 100.0% MOEA-D-FRRMAB I I I P P D P 6 7 85.7% MOEA-D-PaS I D I P D D I 4 7 57.1% MOEA-D-URAW I P P I P I P 7 7 100.0% NSBiDiCo I I I I I I I 7 7 100.0% NSGA-II-SDR D I D I P D D 3 7 42.9% OSP-NSDE D I D X P D I 3 6 50.0% PESA-II P P I P P P I 7 7 100.0% PICEA-g D P P P P D P 5 7 71.4% PREA P P I I P I P 7 7 100.0% S-NSGA-II I P I I I I I 7 7 100.0% SIBEA P P P P X X P 5 5 100.0% SMPSO D I D P P I I 5 7 71.4% SparseEA I I I I I P I 7 7 100.0% SparseEA2 P I I I I P I 7 7 100.0% SPEA-R P I I I I D P 6 7 85.7% SSCEA D P P I P D I 5 7 71.4% t-DEA P P P I P D P 6 7 85.7% tDEA-CPBI I P I P P D I 6 7 85.7% TELSO I I P I I I I 7 7 100.0% TS-NSGA-II D P D P D D D 2 7 28.6% TS-SparseEA P I P I P D D 5 7 71.4% Two Arch2 P P P I P I I 7 7 100.0% VaEA P P I P P P P 7 7 100.0% WASF-GA P I D I I I I 6 7 85.7% WOF I P I I I I I 7 7 100.0% 29 

TABLE S.XIV OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY OUTCOME MATRIX FOR THE WFG S UITE .

Algorithm WFG1 WFG2 WFG3 WFG4 WFG5 WFG6 WFG7 WFG8 WFG9 Pass Valid Coverage AGE-MOEA P P D P P P D P P 7 9 77.8% BCE-IBEA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% BCE-MOEA-D P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% BiGE I I P I I I P I P 9 9 100.0% CLIA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% CMOEA-MS I I I I I I I P I 9 9 100.0% CMOPSO P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% CoMMEA I I D I P I I I I 8 9 88.9% DM-MOEA I P I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% e-MOEA I P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% EFR-RR I I P I I I I P I 9 9 100.0% GDE3 I I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% GrEA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% GWASF-GA P P P P P P P I P 9 9 100.0% KnEA P P P P P I P P P 9 9 100.0% LSMOF I I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% MaOEA-CSS P D D D D D D D D 1 9 11.1% MOEA-D-AWA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DCWV P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA/D-DE I P P P P P P I P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DRA I P I P P P I I I 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DU I P I I I P P P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DYTS I P I P P P I I I 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-FRRMAB I P I P I I P P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-PaS I P D P D P P D D 5 9 55.6% MOEA-D-URAW P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% NSBiDiCo I I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% NSGA-II-SDR P P P I P P P P P 9 9 100.0% OSP-NSDE P I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% PESA-II P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% PICEA-g P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% PREA P P P I I P I P I 9 9 100.0% S-NSGA-II I I I P I I I I I 9 9 100.0% SIBEA I I X I P P X P X 6 6 100.0% SMPSO P P P P P P I P P 9 9 100.0% SparseEA I I P P I P P I I 9 9 100.0% SparseEA2 I P I I I P I I I 9 9 100.0% SPEA-R I P P I P I P P P 9 9 100.0% SSCEA I P I P P P I P I 9 9 100.0% t-DEA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% tDEA-CPBI P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% TELSO P I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% TS-NSGA-II P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% TS-SparseEA P P P P P I P I P 9 9 100.0% Two Arch2 P P I P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% VaEA P P P I I I I P I 9 9 100.0% WASF-GA I I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% WOF I P I P P I I I P 9 9 100.0% 30 

TABLE S.XV OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY OUTCOME MATRIX FOR THE LSMOP S UITE .

Algorithm LSMOP1 LSMOP2 LSMOP3 LSMOP4 LSMOP5 LSMOP6 LSMOP7 LSMOP8 LSMOP9 Pass Valid Coverage AGE-MOEA P P P P P D D I I 7 9 77.8% BCE-IBEA P P P P P D P P I 8 9 88.9% BCE-MOEA-D P P P P D D D I P 6 9 66.7% BiGE P P P P P P D P P 8 9 88.9% CLIA P P P P D P D P X 6 8 75.0% CMOEA-MS I P P P P I I I P 9 9 100.0% CMOPSO P P P P P D D D I 6 9 66.7% CoMMEA I P I P I D I I I 8 9 88.9% DM-MOEA P P I P I I I I I 9 9 100.0% e-MOEA P P P I I P D P P 8 9 88.9% EFR-RR I I I I I P P P P 9 9 100.0% GDE3 P P P P P D P I P 8 9 88.9% GrEA P P P P P D I D P 7 9 77.8% GWASF-GA I I I I I P P I P 9 9 100.0% KnEA P I P I P D P P P 8 9 88.9% LSMOF I P I P D D P P I 7 9 77.8% MaOEA-CSS I D I P I I P P I 8 9 88.9% MOEA-D-AWA I P I P P D P I P 8 9 88.9% MOEA-D-DCWV I P I P I P I P I 9 9 100.0% MOEA/D-DE I P I P I I I P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DRA I I I I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DU P P P P P P P P I 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-DYTS D P D P D D P P P 5 9 55.6% MOEA-D-FRRMAB I P I P I I I P P 9 9 100.0% MOEA-D-PaS P D I P I I I I I 8 9 88.9% MOEA-D-URAW I P P P I I I I I 9 9 100.0% NSBiDiCo P I I I P P P I I 9 9 100.0% NSGA-II-SDR P P P P P D D P P 7 9 77.8% OSP-NSDE D I D I D D D D D 2 9 22.2% PESA-II P P P P P D D P I 7 9 77.8% PICEA-g P P I P P I D D P 7 9 77.8% PREA P P P P P D D P P 7 9 77.8% S-NSGA-II P P P I I I I I I 9 9 100.0% SIBEA I X I X P D I I P 6 7 85.7% SMPSO I P I P I I D P I 8 9 88.9% SparseEA D P D P D D P I I 5 9 55.6% SparseEA2 P P P I P D I I I 8 9 88.9% SPEA-R P D I P P D D P I 6 9 66.7% SSCEA I I I I I I I P I 9 9 100.0% t-DEA P P P P P P P P P 9 9 100.0% tDEA-CPBI I P I P I I D P P 8 9 88.9% TELSO X I X I P P I I I 7 7 100.0% TS-NSGA-II P P P P P D D P P 7 9 77.8% TS-SparseEA D P D I D D P P D 4 9 44.4% Two Arch2 I P I I P I I P I 9 9 100.0% VaEA I P I P I I D P P 8 9 88.9% WASF-GA P I P I P D P P D 7 9 77.8% WOF P P P P D D P P P 7 9 77.8% 31 

TABLE S.XVI OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY OUTCOME MATRIX FOR THE MAF S UITE (M AF1–M AF8; P ART I OF II). 

Algorithm MaF1 MaF2 MaF3 MaF4 MaF5 MaF6 MaF7 MaF8 AGE-MOEA P P D P D P P P

BCE-IBEA P P I P I D P P

BCE-MOEA-D P P D P P D P P

BiGE I P D I I D P I

CLIA P P D P I P P P

CMOEA-MS P I D P I D D I

CMOPSO P I I P P P I P

CoMMEA I I I I D D I P

DM-MOEA I I I I I D P I

e-MOEA P P I P I P I P

EFR-RR I P I I I P P I

GDE3 I I I P P D I I

GrEA P P P P P D P P

GWASF-GA I I D P I D D D

KnEA P P D P I D D I

LSMOF I I I P I I I P

MaOEA-CSS D D P P D P D D

MOEA-D-AWA P P D P I P P P

MOEA-D-DCWV P P D P P D I P

MOEA/D-DE P P P P D P P P

MOEA-D-DRA I I I I I P P I

MOEA-D-DU P I P P I P I I

MOEA-D-DYTS I I I P I P I P

MOEA-D-FRRMAB I I I I P P P I

MOEA-D-PaS P P I P P D I I

MOEA-D-URAW P P I I I P P P

NSBiDiCo I I I I I D I D

NSGA-II-SDR I P D D I D D P

OSP-NSDE I I D D X D I P

PESA-II P P P I P D I P

PICEA-g P P D P P P P P

PREA I P P P I D P P

S-NSGA-II I I I I P D P I

SIBEA P X P P I D P I

SMPSO I I D D P D P P

SparseEA P I I I I D I D

SparseEA2 I I I I I D P P

SPEA-R P P P I P D P I

SSCEA P P D P I P I I

t-DEA P P D P I P P I

tDEA-CPBI I P P I I D I I

TELSO I I I P I I I I

TS-NSGA-II P P D P P D D I

TS-SparseEA P I I I P D D I

Two Arch2 P P D P I P I I

VaEA P I I I P D I P

WASF-GA I I D P I P I D

WOF I P I I I D I I32 

TABLE S.XVII OPTIMIZATION -F IDELITY OUTCOME MATRIX FOR THE MAF S UITE (M AF9–M AF15; P ART II OF II).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

> Algorithm MaF9 MaF10 MaF11 MaF12 MaF13 MaF14 MaF15 Pass Valid Coverage AGE-MOEA PPPPPPP13 15 86.7% BCE-IBEA DPPPPPP13 15 86.7% BCE-MOEA-D DPPPPDD10 15 66.7% BiGE PIIIPPP13 15 86.7% CLIA PPPPPDD12 15 80.0% CMOEA-MS IIIIPPP12 15 80.0% CMOPSO IPPPPPP15 15 100.0% CoMMEA IIIIIII13 15 86.7% DM-MOEA IIPIPIP14 15 93.3% e-MOEA PIPPIPI15 15 100.0% EFR-RR IIIIPPP15 15 100.0% GDE3 DIIIIII13 15 86.7% GrEA DPPPPPD12 15 80.0% GWASF-GA DPPPIII10 15 66.7% KnEA IPPPIPP12 15 80.0% LSMOF IIIIIIP15 15 100.0% MaOEA-CSS DPDDDIP615 40.0% MOEA-D-AWA PPPIPPP14 15 93.3% MOEA-D-DCWV PPPPPIP13 15 86.7% MOEA/D-DE PIPPPIP14 15 93.3% MOEA-D-DRA PIPPIII15 15 100.0% MOEA-D-DU PIPIPPP15 15 100.0% MOEA-D-DYTS PIPIIPP15 15 100.0% MOEA-D-FRRMAB IIPPIIP15 15 100.0% MOEA-D-PaS IIPDPIP13 15 86.7% MOEA-D-URAW IPPPPIP15 15 100.0% NSBiDiCo IIIIIII13 15 86.7% NSGA-II-SDR DPPPPPP10 15 66.7% OSP-NSDE DPIIIDP914 64.3% PESA-II DPPPPPP13 15 86.7% PICEA-g PPPPDPP13 15 86.7% PREA PPPIPPP14 15 93.3% S-NSGA-II IIIPIII14 15 93.3% SIBEA PIPXPPP12 13 92.3% SMPSO IPPPPII12 15 80.0% SparseEA PIIIPIP13 15 86.7% SparseEA2 PIPIIPP14 15 93.3% SPEA-R IIPPPIP14 15 93.3% SSCEA IIPIPII14 15 93.3% t-DEA IPPPPPP14 15 93.3% tDEA-CPBI PPPPPII14 15 93.3% TELSO PPIIIXI14 14 100.0% TS-NSGA-II PPPPPPP12 15 80.0% TS-SparseEA IPPPIDD11 15 73.3% Two Arch2 PPPPDII13 15 86.7% VaEA PPPIPII14 15 93.3% WASF-GA DIIIIPP12 15 80.0% WOF IIPPPPP14 15 93.3%

IV. S UPPLEMENTARY SCALING RESULTS 

This section reports the complete scaling results for the 48 tensorized implementations. Runtime scalability is evaluated on DTLZ3 with three objectives. EvoX denotes the tensorized GPU implementation and PlatEMO denotes the MATLAB CPU baseline. Population scaling varies N over {256 , 512 , 1024 , 2048 , 4096 , 8192 , 16384 } while fixing the decision dimension at 

D = 12 . Dimension scaling fixes N = 1000 and varies D over {1024 , 2048 , 4096 , 8192 , 16384 , 32768 , 65536 }. The EvoX workflow step is compiled using torch.compile , and initialization and compilation costs are excluded. Runtime is reported in milliseconds per generation using the average over 100 generations. A three-hour PlatEMO timeout corresponds to 108000 ms/gen. When the corresponding EvoX run completes, the timeout-derived speedup is reported as a lower bound rather than a measured value. EvoX OOM events terminate without a valid runtime and are reported separately. 

A. Aggregate Results and Selected Cases 

Across all completed pairs, population scaling contains 289 measured comparisons and dimension scaling contains 276. The corresponding median measured speedups are 22 .6× and 80 .2×, the geometric means are 29 .9× and 71 .5×, and the interquartile ranges are 4.5–163 .5× and 8.4–404 .9×, respectively. PlatEMO reaches the time limit in 30 population-scaling and 42 dimension-scaling cases. Among these, 26 and 34 cases, respectively, have valid EvoX runtimes and contribute lower-bound speedups to the scale-wise distributions. The remaining 4 and 8 cases coincide with EvoX OOM events and therefore have no speedup value. Across all settings, EvoX encounters 6 population-scaling and 11 dimension-scaling OOM events. PlatEMO encounters 15 and 17 execution errors, respectively, together with one additional OOM event under dimension scaling. Extreme scaling cases are retained for completeness rather than used to characterize typical acceleration. Among completed pairs, the largest measured speedups are 37339 .0× for MOEA/D-DE at N = 16384 and 23467 .4× for DM-MOEA at D = 8192 .Among PlatEMO timeout cases with valid EvoX runtimes, the largest reported lower bounds are 29900 .3× for MaOEA-CSS 33 

at N = 1024 and 105365 .9× for MaOEA-CSS at both D = 2048 and D = 4096 . These extrema are shown in the complete algorithm-level curves below, while the median and interquartile range characterize the central distribution. Fig. S.6 summarizes the exception counts, and Table S.XVIII provides the corresponding records. Population EvoX Population PlatEMO Dimension EvoX Dimension PlatEMO 010 20 30 40 50 60  

> Exception count
> OOM Timeout ERROR
> Fig. S.6. Runtime-scaling exception counts by implementation and scaling axis, separated into timeout, execution-error, and out-of-memory cases.

B. Complete Curves and Exception Records 

Figs. S.7–S.11 report the complete population- and dimension-scaling curves for all 48 algorithms. PlatEMO timeouts are displayed at 108000 ms/gen, and a lower-bound speedup is computed only when the corresponding EvoX runtime is valid. Out-of-memory (OOM) events are marked by a diamond, and execution errors are marked by a cross. For an EvoX OOM event, the marker is placed at the preceding valid runtime to identify the failing scale without treating it as a valid measurement. Table S.XVIII subsequently lists every exception record, including its scale, implementation side, and exception type. 34 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

21.4x 

(a) AGE-MOEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 96.9x (b) AGE-MOEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM 

39.4x (c) BCE-IBEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

74.2x (d) BCE-IBEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 11.7x 

(e) BCE-MOEA-D: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3.0x (f) BCE-MOEA-D: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 1135.6x (g) BiGE: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

790.0x (h) BiGE: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 22.0x 

(i) CLIA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

1.5x (j) CLIA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) OOM Timeout 

over 2.0x (k) CMOEA-MS: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

60.9x (l) CMOEA-MS: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 278.1x 

(m) CMOPSO: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

1088.6x (n) CMOPSO: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

ERROR 

17146.7x (o) CoMMEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR (p) CoMMEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 945.6x 

(q) DM-MOEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM ERROR 

23467.4x (r) DM-MOEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

560.0x (s) EFR-RR: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

194.8x (t) EFR-RR: varying D

Fig. S.7. Complete population-size ( N ) and decision-dimension ( D) scaling results for AGE-MOEA through EFR-RR (Part I of V). Adjacent panels report the two scaling axes for each algorithm. 35 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3204.6x 

(a) e-MOEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM 1780.1x (b) e-MOEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 77.5x (c) GDE3: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

506.9x (d) GDE3: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 25.5x 

(e) GrEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

29.2x (f) GrEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

818.4x (g) GWASF-GA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

220.3x (h) GWASF-GA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3.9x 

(i) KnEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

21.4x (j) KnEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 87.2x (k) LSMOF: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

1935.9x (l) LSMOF: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 61.0x 

(m) MaOEA-CSS: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 32481.2x (n) MaOEA-CSS: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 22.7x (o) MOEA-D-AWA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

75.4x (p) MOEA-D-AWA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 7867.7x 

(q) MOEA-D-DCWV: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

364.6x (r) MOEA-D-DCWV: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

37339.0x (s) MOEA/D-DE: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

287.1x (t) MOEA/D-DE: varying D

Fig. S.8. Complete population-size ( N ) and decision-dimension ( D) scaling results for e-MOEA through MOEA/D-DE (Part II of V). Adjacent panels report the two scaling axes for each algorithm. 36 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

23.1x 

(a) MOEA-D-DRA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

74.6x (b) MOEA-D-DRA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

1556.9x (c) MOEA-D-DU: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

364.4x (d) MOEA-D-DU: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 

55.7x 

(e) MOEA-D-DYTS: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

74.8x (f) MOEA-D-DYTS: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3771.3x (g) MOEA-D-FRRMAB: varying 

N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

136.3x 

(h) MOEA-D-FRRMAB: varying 

D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 4.6x 

(i) MOEA-D-PaS: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

214.4x (j) MOEA-D-PaS: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 

29.0x (k) MOEA-D-URAW: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 14.0x (l) MOEA-D-URAW: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM 

3.3x 

(m) NSBiDiCo: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

12.8x (n) NSBiDiCo: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

743.8x (o) NSGA-II-SDR: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

5068.6x (p) NSGA-II-SDR: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

63.0x 

(q) OSP-NSDE: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

over 239.9x (r) OSP-NSDE: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 5.6x (s) PESA-II: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

7771.6x (t) PESA-II: varying D

Fig. S.9. Complete population-size ( N ) and decision-dimension ( D) scaling results for MOEA-D-DRA through PESA-II (Part III of V). Adjacent panels report the two scaling axes for each algorithm. 37 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 

2.6x 

(a) PICEA-g: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

ERROR (b) PICEA-g: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

ERROR 

4198.8x (c) PREA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

185.6x (d) PREA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 933.4x 

(e) SIBEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

Timeout 

over 10746.3x (f) SIBEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 10.8x (g) SMPSO: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 20.8x (h) SMPSO: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

0.4x 

(i) S-NSGA-II: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3.8x (j) S-NSGA-II: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

26.0x (k) SparseEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

over 85.1x (l) SparseEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

554.6x 

(m) SparseEA2: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

over 46.5x (n) SparseEA2: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

858.2x (o) SPEA-R: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

946.0x (p) SPEA-R: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

13.5x 

(q) SSCEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 19.8x (r) SSCEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

850.2x (s) t-DEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

2844.0x (t) t-DEA: varying D

Fig. S.10. Complete population-size ( N ) and decision-dimension ( D) scaling results for PICEA-g through t-DEA (Part IV of V). Adjacent panels report the two scaling axes for each algorithm. 38 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 49.0x 

(a) tDEA-CPBI: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3546.7x (b) tDEA-CPBI: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 3545.2x (c) TELSO: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

over 5354.2x (d) TELSO: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 920.0x 

(e) TS-NSGA-II: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

664.5x (f) TS-NSGA-II: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 22.5x (g) TS-SparseEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

OOM Timeout 

over 1420.0x (h) TS-SparseEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) Timeout 

over 32.7x 

(i) Two Arch2: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

301.0x (j) Two Arch2: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR Timeout 

over 515.9x (k) VaEA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

126.0x (l) VaEA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

5865.7x 

(m) WASF-GA: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

295.5x (n) WASF-GA: varying D256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 

Population Size 

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 60.4x (o) WOF: varying N1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 

Dimension 

10 2

10 3

10 4

> Runtime (ms/gen)

EvoX (GPU) PlatEMO (CPU) 

3.8x (p) WOF: varying D

Fig. S.11. Complete population-size ( N ) and decision-dimension ( D) scaling results for tDEA-CPBI through WOF (Part V of V). Adjacent panels report the two scaling axes for each algorithm. 39 

TABLE S.XVIII RUNTIME -S CALING EXCEPTIONS ACROSS POPULATION SIZE AND DECISION DIMENSION .

Scaling Algorithm Scale axis Scale value Implementation Exception Count Population BCE-IBEA Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population BCE-MOEA-D Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 1Population BiGE Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population CMOEA-MS Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population CMOEA-MS Population Size 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 2Population CMOPSO Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population CoMMEA Population Size 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 4Population DM-MOEA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population EFR-RR Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population EFR-RR Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population GWASF-GA Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population GWASF-GA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population MaOEA-CSS Population Size 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 5Population MOEA-D-AWA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population MOEA-D-DCWV Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population MOEA-D-DYTS Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 1Population MOEA-D-PaS Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population MOEA-D-URAW Population Size 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 2Population NSBiDiCo Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population PICEA-g Population Size 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 5Population PREA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 1Population SIBEA Population Size 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 6Population SSCEA Population Size 16384 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Population SSCEA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population TELSO Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population TS-NSGA-II Population Size 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 2Population TS-SparseEA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Population Two Arch2 Population Size 8192, 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 2Population VaEA Population Size 16384 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 1Population VaEA Population Size 4096, 8192 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 2Dimension CoMMEA Dimension 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 7Dimension DM-MOEA Dimension 16384, 32768, 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 3Dimension DM-MOEA Dimension 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 3Dimension e-MOEA Dimension 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) OOM 1Dimension MaOEA-CSS Dimension 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 7Dimension OSP-NSDE Dimension 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Dimension OSP-NSDE Dimension 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 7Dimension PICEA-g Dimension 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) ERROR 7Dimension SIBEA Dimension 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 7Dimension SMPSO Dimension 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 1Dimension SparseEA Dimension 16384, 32768, 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 3Dimension SparseEA Dimension 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 4Dimension SparseEA2 Dimension 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Dimension SparseEA2 Dimension 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 4Dimension SSCEA Dimension 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 2Dimension TELSO Dimension 32768, 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 2Dimension TELSO Dimension 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 5Dimension TS-SparseEA Dimension 65536 EvoX (GPU) OOM 1Dimension TS-SparseEA Dimension 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768, 65536 PlatEMO (CPU) TIMEOUT 540 

V. T RANSFER TO EXTERNAL MOEA I MPLEMENTATIONS 

A. Purpose, Sources, and Matched Inclusion 

This experiment tests whether EvoCoCo transfers beyond the current PlatEMO v4.14 setting to external or legacy MATLAB/Octave implementations. The sources differ from the retained PlatEMO benchmark in coding conventions, helper routines, and algorithm organization. Nine algorithms use standalone implementations, whereas LSMaODE was developed for an earlier PlatEMO interface and produces compatibility errors when executed directly under PlatEMO v4.14. The experiment therefore evaluates transfer across heterogeneous source styles, including both standalone and legacy framework-based implementations. Table S.XIX lists the ten source MOEAs, the normalized identifiers used in the result files, and the corresponding GitHub repositories. Multiple DEMO variants originate from the same repository. 

TABLE S.XIX EXTERNAL AND LEGACY MATLAB/O CTAVE ALGORITHMS AND SOURCE REPOSITORIES USED TO EVALUATE TRANSFER TO EXTERNAL MOEA 

> IMPLEMENTATIONS

.                      

> Result identifier Source implementation GitHub repository DEMO DEMO MATLAB/Octave implementation [84] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO DEMO IBEA DEMO variant using IBEA-style selection [84], [85] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO DEMO PBEA DEMO variant using PBEA-style selection [84], [86] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO ISDE plus ISDE+ MATLAB implementation [87] https://github.com/RammohanMallipeddi/ Matlab-code-for-ISDE-LSMaODE Implementation developed for an earlier PlatEMO interface [88] https://github.com/MaOEA/LSMaODE PAR DEMO IND PAR-DEMO variant using indicator-based selection [89] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO PAR DEMO NDS PAR-DEMO variant using nondominated sorting [89] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO RTEA RTEA MATLAB implementation [90] https://github.com/fieldsend/ieee tec 2014 rtea R DEMO R-DEMO MATLAB/Octave implementation [84], [91] https://github.com/fcampelo/DEMO Two Arch2 Two Arch2 MATLAB implementation [82] https://github.com/HandingWang/Two Arch2

EvoCoCo and the one-shot baseline each contribute five attempts for every source, which yields 10 × 5 = 50 matched gener-ated implementations per method. The EvoCoCo directory also contains two additional R-DEMO attempts, R_DEMO_run6.py 

and R_DEMO_run7.py . They are excluded because the one-shot directory has no corresponding attempts. All aggregate and algorithm-level comparisons below therefore use identical denominators. 

B. Generation and Evaluation Protocol 

EvoCoCo uses a staged workflow comprising the Analysis Agent, Rule Retriever, Blueprint Agent, parallel Tensorization Agents, Repair Agent, and Selection Agent. Table S.XX summarizes these roles and their recorded artifacts. Every matched run uses the same six tensorization strategies: Broadcasting, Einsum Optimization, Masked Operations, In-Place Efficiency, Advanced Operations, and Tensorized Iterative Selection. 

TABLE S.XX EVO COCO WORKFLOW STAGES USED IN THE EXPERIMENT EVALUATING TRANSFER TO EXTERNAL MOEA IMPLEMENTATIONS .       

> Stage Function Analysis Agent Analyze source algorithmic semantics and transformation requirements Rule Retriever Retrieve task-relevant implementation and tensorization rules Blueprint Agent Construct the target transformation blueprint Tensorization Agents Generate six candidates using distinct tensorization strategies Repair Agent Repair candidates using static and runtime feedback Selection Agent Select the final candidate from validated branches

The 50 matched EvoCoCo runs produce 300 branch records, of which 248 are marked successful and 52 failed. The recorded runtime-repair counts are 189 branches with no repair, 39 with one repair, and 72 with two repairs. Each branch record contains two static-fix attempts. Table S.XXI reports generation-pipeline cost rather than optimizer runtime; corresponding per-run statistics are unavailable for the one-shot outputs. 41 

TABLE S.XXI GENERATION DIAGNOSTICS FOR THE 50 MATCHED EVO COCO CONVERSION ATTEMPTS , INCLUDING BRANCH USAGE , REPAIR ACTIVITY , AND FINAL CANDIDATE SELECTION .         

> Diagnostic Value Average total tokens per run 229,003 Median total tokens per run 191,598.5 Minimum total tokens per run 125,561 Maximum total tokens per run 592,376 Average total LLM time per run 375.92 s Median total LLM time per run 350.44 s Minimum total LLM time per run 157.12 s Maximum total LLM time per run 627.53 s

The generated implementations target EvoX/PyTorch and use DTLZ2 with population size N = 100 , three objectives, and D = 12 . During migration, each generated implementation undergoes a lightweight 50-generation validation run. The corresponding demo block performs 49 update iterations after initialization. This run is used only for execution validation and repair and is not included in the final evaluation. For the final benchmark, complete algorithms are independently evaluated for 100 generations under the same problem setting. An executable algorithm is considered converged when its final IGD after 100 generations is below 0.25. Average IGD and runtime are not used for the main comparison because the one-shot method converges on only nine attempts; conditioning on this small and method-dependent success set would obscure the reliability difference. 

C. Aggregate Reliability and Failure Stages 

Across the 50 matched attempts per method, EvoCoCo achieves syntax, execution, and convergence pass rates of 100%, 96%, and 62%, respectively, compared with 70%, 34%, and 18% for one-shot generation. Table S.XXII decomposes these outcomes into mutually exclusive failure stages and reports both percentages and counts. EvoCoCo remains near the top of the evaluation sequence through syntax and execution and loses most unsuccessful cases only at convergence, whereas the one-shot baseline loses many attempts before optimization outcomes are assessed. The four mutually exclusive outcomes in Table S.XXII distinguish incomplete or unparsable artifacts, runtime failures among syntactically valid files, convergence failures among executable files, and converged implementations. EvoCoCo eliminates syntax-level failures and reduces runtime failures from 18 to two. Its remaining failures are mainly executable implementations that do not meet the final-IGD threshold. 

TABLE S.XXII FAILURE -STAGE TAXONOMY FOR THE MATCHED CONVERSIONS OF EXTERNAL OR LEGACY IMPLEMENTATIONS . C ELLS REPORT PERCENTAGES , WITH COUNTS IN PARENTHESES ; CATEGORIES ARE MUTUALLY EXCLUSIVE AND ASSIGNED BY THE EARLIEST UNSUCCESSFUL EVALUATION STAGE .            

> Method Syntax/incomplete Runtime failure Convergence failure Converged EvoCoCo 0% (0/50) 4% (2/50) 34% (17/50) 62% (31/50) One-shot 30% (15/50) 36% (18/50) 16% (8/50) 18% (9/50)

D. Algorithm-Level Outcomes 

Table S.XXIII gives the complete algorithm-level decomposition. EvoCoCo obtains at least one converged implementation for nine of the ten sources and achieves five of five converged attempts for DEMO and Two-Arch2. R-DEMO is the only source with no converged EvoCoCo attempt; four of its five matched outputs execute but remain above the convergence threshold. One-shot generation obtains convergence only for DEMO and ISDE+. 

TABLE S.XXIII ALGORITHM -LEVEL EXECUTION AND CONVERGENCE COUNTS IN THE EXPERIMENT EVALUATING TRANSFER TO EXTERNAL MOEA IMPLEMENTATIONS .EACH ALGORITHM CONTRIBUTES FIVE MATCHED ATTEMPTS PER METHOD .                                                                                         

> EvoCoCo One-shot Algorithm Syn. Run. Conv. fail Conv. Syn. Run. Conv. fail Conv. DEMO 00051004DEMO IBEA 00140050DEMO PBEA 00140500ISDE plus 01040005LSMaODE 00143110PAR DEMO IND 00414100PAR DEMO NDS 00325000RTEA 00320320R DEMO 01400500Two Arch2 0005230042

The algorithm-level counts show that EvoCoCo’s successes extend across nine sources, whereas one-shot success is concentrated in DEMO and ISDE+. This imbalance is another reason not to compare conditional IGD values without the accompanying reliability denominators. 

E. Truncation and Residual Failures 

Manual inspection identifies output truncation as the dominant syntax-failure pattern in one-shot generation. Many of the 15 syntax-failing files terminate inside a token, expression, import, function call, or formatted string rather than exhibiting an isolated local syntax error. Table S.XXIV lists representative endings. These failures are concentrated in longer or structurally complex sources: all five PAR DEMO NDS attempts, four PAR DEMO IND attempts, three LSMaODE attempts, two Two Arch2 attempts, and one DEMO attempt are incomplete or unparsable. 

TABLE S.XXIV REPRESENTATIVE TRUNCATION PATTERNS IN INCOMPLETE ONE -SHOT CONVERSION OUTPUTS .                       

> File Parser diagnostic Truncated tail
> Two_Arch2_run4.py Bracket never closed while curr_pop.shape[0 PAR_DEMO_NDS_run4.py Parenthesis never closed n_objs=n_ PAR_DEMO_IND_run5.py Parenthesis never closed torch.where(mask, off_pop, self. LSMaODE_run5.py Bracket never closed torch.clamp(off_dec[rows, k_ PAR_DEMO_NDS_run2.py Invalid syntax from ev DEMO_run4.py Incomplete format specifier {total_time:.4 LSMaODE_run3.py Parenthesis never closed p2[case_b] -p

The two EvoCoCo runtime failures occur for ISDE+ and R-DEMO. Its other unsuccessful matched attempts are convergence failures: the generated implementations are complete and runnable but do not satisfy the convergence criterion. The experiment therefore supports a bounded transfer claim. Staged analysis, repair, and selection increase the probability of obtaining a usable transformation from external or legacy sources, but they do not guarantee convergence for every algorithm. VI. D ETAILED ABLATION RESULTS 

The ablation experiment identifies which EvoCoCo modules address different transformation failure mechanisms. Five variants are evaluated on a stratified 12-algorithm subset with five independent generation attempts per algorithm, which yields 60 runs per variant and 300 runs in total. All variants use Gemini 3 Flash and the same DTLZ2 validation protocol as the primary migration experiment. The subset is diagnostic rather than selected to maximize success: it contains stable-success controls, convergence-challenging algorithms, MOEA/D-family algorithms, runtime-sensitive cases, and structurally complex source implementations. 

A. Diagnostic Strata and Variant Design 

TABLE S.XXV DIAGNOSTIC STRATA AND ALGORITHM COMPOSITION OF THE STRATIFIED 12-ALGORITHM ABLATION SUBSET .            

> Stratum Algorithms Diagnostic purpose Stable-success control BCE-IBEA, NSGA-II-SDR Tests whether ablations damage algorithms transformed reliably by full EvoCoCo Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA, GrEA, SMPSO, SparseEA Tests whether executable transformations retain acceptable optimization outcomes MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA, MOEA-D-PaS Covers decomposition-based mechanisms with implementation-sensitive details Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA, SIBEA Covers runtime-sensitive tensor-shape and API failures Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2, WOF Covers interface mismatch and structurally complex source implementa-tions

The full EvoCoCo pipeline serves as the reference. The other variants are denoted as w/o Blueprint Agent, w/o Repair Agent, w/o Rule Retrieval, and w/o Multi-Branch. The first three remove the Blueprint Agent, Repair Agent, and rule retrieval, respectively. The w/o Multi-Branch variant uses a single tensorization branch instead of generating and selecting among multiple branches. Syntax pass denotes parsable Python code; static pass additionally checks undefined symbols, forbidden imports, and incompatible patterns; execution pass denotes a candidate that runs under the benchmark harness; and convergence requires an executable run to meet the predefined final-IGD criterion. Average IGD is calculated only over converged runs. 43 

B. Aggregate Reliability and Failure Subtypes 

Figure S.12 summarizes the aggregate execution, convergence, and conditional-IGD results reported in the main paper. Full EvoCoCo achieves the highest execution and convergence rates. Removing the Repair Agent or multi-branch generation and selection produces the largest end-to-end degradation, whereas removing the Blueprint Agent or rule retrieval retains higher aggregate success but changes the underlying static and interface failure profile. w/o Blueprint Agent w/o Repair Agent w/o Rule Retrieval w/o Multi-Branch Full EvoCoCo 020 40 60 80 100 

> Success rate (%)

Exec. pass Converged Avg. IGD 0.075 0.080 0.085 0.090 0.095 0.100 0.105 0.110 

> Avg. IGD
> 95.0 60.0 93.3 68.3 98.3 78.3 41.7 75.0 40.0 83.3
> Fig. S.12. Ablation performance on the stratified 12-algorithm subset. Bars show execution and convergence rates over 60 attempts per variant; the line shows mean IGD over converged attempts. Full EvoCoCo denotes the reference configuration.

The failure analysis groups observed defects into four diagnostic subtypes. Static issues include unavailable symbols, forbidden imports, and incompatible code patterns. EvoX API misuse or missing API covers incorrect calls, missing lifecycle methods, and invalid state fields. Tensor shape mismatch covers incompatible reshape, indexing, broadcasting, or population/objective dimensions. Poor convergence denotes an executable implementation that does not meet the final-IGD criterion. These subtype counts record defects observed during generation and repair and are not mutually exclusive terminal outcomes. A candidate may therefore contain an intermediate static or runtime defect that is subsequently repaired and still contribute to the final execution or convergence pass rate.                            

> TABLE S.XXVI FAILURE -SUBTYPE COUNTS FOR THE EVO COCO ABLATION VARIANTS ON THE STRATIFIED 12-ALGORITHM SUBSET . C OUNTS ARE AGGREGATED OVER
> 60 CONVERSION ATTEMPTS PER VARIANT .
> Variant Static Poor conv. API misuse/missing Shape mismatch w/o Blueprint Agent 14 10 20w/o Repair Agent 212 11 7w/o Rule Retrieval 18 11 12w/o Multi-Branch 15 17 10 4Full EvoCoCo 6900

The subtype results explain why execution success alone is insufficient for interpreting the ablation. The Repair Agent ablation retains high static validity but records 11 API misuse or missing-API cases and seven tensor shape mismatches. These defects therefore emerge primarily during execution. The rule-retrieval ablation instead records 18 static issues but only three API or shape cases. This pattern indicates that retrieved implementation rules mainly prevent invalid dependencies, undefined symbols, and incompatible conventions before execution. Multi-branch generation and selection has the broadest effect: its removal produces the largest total subtype count and increases both runtime-level defects and poor-convergence outcomes. 

C. Complete Algorithm-Level Results 

Table S.XXVII reports the complete algorithm-level results behind the compact main-paper table. The failure-profile column gives counts within each five-run algorithm block; runtime failures are non-executing runs, and convergence failures are executable runs that do not meet the predefined criterion. 44 

TABLE S.XXVII ALGORITHM -L EVEL ABLATION RESULTS BY DIAGNOSTIC STRATUM .

Variant Stratum Algorithm Syntax Static Exec. Conv. Avg. IGD Time Failure profile Full EvoCoCo Stable-success control BCE-IBEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0782 14.28 none Full EvoCoCo Stable-success control NSGA-II-SDR 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0626 1.82 none Full EvoCoCo Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA 5/5 4/5 4/5 4/5 0.1166 2.43 1 static; 1 runtime Full EvoCoCo Convergence-challenging GrEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 3/5 0.0919 2.04 2 convergence Full EvoCoCo Convergence-challenging SMPSO 5/5 5/5 5/5 4/5 0.0999 0.44 1 convergence Full EvoCoCo Convergence-challenging SparseEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 2/5 0.1525 1.16 1 static; 3 convergence Full EvoCoCo MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 0.0934 1.06 1 static Full EvoCoCo MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-PaS 5/5 4/5 5/5 4/5 0.0789 1.19 1 static; 1 convergence Full EvoCoCo Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 4/5 0.1529 1.16 1 static; 1 convergence Full EvoCoCo Runtime-crash coverage SIBEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0816 5.86 none Full EvoCoCo Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0958 6.86 none Full EvoCoCo Structural/interface complexity WOF 5/5 4/5 5/5 4/5 0.0714 2.70 1 static; 1 convergence w/o Blueprint Agent Stable-success control BCE-IBEA 5/5 2/5 4/5 3/5 0.0950 7.70 3 static; 1 runtime; 1 conver-gence w/o Blueprint Agent Stable-success control NSGA-II-SDR 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 0.0599 1.30 1 static w/o Blueprint Agent Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 0.0697 1.77 1 static w/o Blueprint Agent Convergence-challenging GrEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 0/5 – 2.16 5 convergence w/o Blueprint Agent Convergence-challenging SMPSO 5/5 4/5 5/5 4/5 0.0886 0.88 1 static; 1 convergence w/o Blueprint Agent Convergence-challenging SparseEA 5/5 3/5 5/5 4/5 0.0777 3.77 2 static; 1 convergence w/o Blueprint Agent MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 0.0634 4.44 1 static w/o Blueprint Agent MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-PaS 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 0.0930 1.41 1 static w/o Blueprint Agent Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 3/5 0.1202 0.77 1 static; 2 convergence w/o Blueprint Agent Runtime-crash coverage SIBEA 5/5 4/5 4/5 4/5 0.0703 1.08 1 static; 1 runtime w/o Blueprint Agent Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2 5/5 3/5 4/5 4/5 0.1149 7.84 2 static; 1 runtime w/o Blueprint Agent Structural/interface complexity WOF 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0690 1.08 none w/o Repair Agent Stable-success control BCE-IBEA 5/5 5/5 4/5 3/5 0.1028 3.64 1 runtime; 1 convergence w/o Repair Agent Stable-success control NSGA-II-SDR 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0628 0.95 none w/o Repair Agent Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA 5/5 5/5 3/5 2/5 0.1430 2.69 2 runtime; 1 convergence w/o Repair Agent Convergence-challenging GrEA 5/5 5/5 3/5 1/5 0.0677 6.82 2 runtime; 2 convergence w/o Repair Agent Convergence-challenging SMPSO 5/5 5/5 3/5 1/5 0.1126 0.83 2 runtime; 2 convergence w/o Repair Agent Convergence-challenging SparseEA 5/5 4/5 4/5 1/5 0.0864 4.03 1 static; 1 runtime; 3 conver-gence w/o Repair Agent MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA 5/5 5/5 0/5 0/5 – – 5 runtime w/o Repair Agent MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-PaS 5/5 4/5 2/5 2/5 0.1353 0.88 1 static; 3 runtime w/o Repair Agent Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 4/5 0.1256 1.24 1 convergence w/o Repair Agent Runtime-crash coverage SIBEA 5/5 5/5 0/5 0/5 – – 5 runtime w/o Repair Agent Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2 5/5 5/5 3/5 3/5 0.1203 12.59 2 runtime w/o Repair Agent Structural/interface complexity WOF 5/5 5/5 4/5 3/5 0.0679 0.83 1 runtime; 1 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Stable-success control BCE-IBEA 5/5 5/5 5/5 4/5 0.0876 11.67 1 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Stable-success control NSGA-II-SDR 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.1595 5.47 none w/o Rule Retrieval Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 4/5 0.1284 8.66 1 static; 1 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Convergence-challenging GrEA 5/5 4/5 5/5 0/5 – 9.23 1 static; 5 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Convergence-challenging SMPSO 5/5 4/5 4/5 4/5 0.0958 0.80 1 static; 1 runtime w/o Rule Retrieval Convergence-challenging SparseEA 5/5 3/5 4/5 3/5 0.0985 1.14 2 static; 1 runtime; 1 conver-gence w/o Rule Retrieval MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA 5/5 3/5 5/5 5/5 0.0932 13.81 2 static w/o Rule Retrieval MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-PaS 5/5 1/5 5/5 5/5 0.0796 5.22 4 static w/o Rule Retrieval Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA 5/5 1/5 5/5 3/5 0.0729 2.22 4 static; 2 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Runtime-crash coverage SIBEA 5/5 5/5 3/5 2/5 0.1175 9.04 2 runtime; 1 convergence w/o Rule Retrieval Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2 5/5 2/5 5/5 5/5 0.0908 26.49 3 static w/o Rule Retrieval Structural/interface complexity WOF 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 0.0712 1.04 none w/o Multi-Branch Stable-success control BCE-IBEA 5/5 3/5 4/5 2/5 0.0885 17.43 2 static; 1 runtime; 2 conver-gence w/o Multi-Branch Stable-success control NSGA-II-SDR 5/5 4/5 4/5 2/5 0.0596 7.13 1 static; 1 runtime; 2 conver-gence w/o Multi-Branch Convergence-challenging AGE-MOEA 5/5 4/5 3/5 0/5 – 3.36 1 static; 2 runtime; 3 conver-gence w/o Multi-Branch Convergence-challenging GrEA 5/5 5/5 3/5 0/5 – 10.59 2 runtime; 3 convergence w/o Multi-Branch Convergence-challenging SMPSO 5/5 5/5 5/5 4/5 0.0960 1.83 1 convergence w/o Multi-Branch Convergence-challenging SparseEA 5/5 3/5 4/5 3/5 0.0711 6.67 2 static; 1 runtime; 1 conver-gence w/o Multi-Branch MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-AWA 5/5 4/5 4/5 4/5 0.1347 13.42 1 static; 1 runtime w/o Multi-Branch MOEA/D-family coverage MOEA-D-PaS 5/5 2/5 4/5 3/5 0.0983 3.92 3 static; 1 runtime; 1 conver-gence w/o Multi-Branch Runtime-crash coverage DM-MOEA 5/5 5/5 2/5 1/5 0.1606 5.57 3 runtime; 1 convergence w/o Multi-Branch Runtime-crash coverage SIBEA 5/5 5/5 1/5 1/5 0.1329 1.46 4 runtime w/o Multi-Branch Structural/interface complexity Two Arch2 5/5 2/5 3/5 3/5 0.0879 13.60 3 static; 2 runtime w/o Multi-Branch Structural/interface complexity WOF 5/5 3/5 4/5 1/5 0.2025 6.49 2 static; 1 runtime; 3 conver-gence 

Note: failure profile reports run counts within each five-run algorithm block. Runtime failures are non-executing runs; convergence failures are executable runs that do not satisfy the predefined convergence criterion. Avg. IGD and mean time are computed over converged and executable runs, respectively. 

The detailed rows localize these aggregate effects. Without the Repair Agent, all five MOEA-D-AWA and all five SIBEA attempts fail during execution; the complete pipeline executes all ten corresponding attempts. Removing multi-branch generation and selection is particularly harmful for DM-MOEA, SIBEA, and WOF, for which only one of five attempts converges. Rule retrieval and the Blueprint Agent mainly affect static validity and interface alignment, while the full pipeline removes the observed API-misuse and tensor-shape subtype failures in this diagnostic subset. These algorithm-level patterns are consistent with the aggregate trends in the main paper.