Title: DeSyR: A Decoupled Symbolic Recovery Framework with PINN-Guided Structure Search and Physics-Informed Coefficient Refinement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.00530v1

Published Time: Wed, 02 Sep 2026 00:30:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 87

Markdown Content:
# DeSyR: A Decoupled Symbolic Recovery Framework with PINN-Guided Structure Search and Physics-Informed Coefficient Refinement 

Pancheng Niu a, Jun Guo a, ∗, Qiaolin He b, Jingcai Guo c, Yanchao Shi d

> aChengdu University of Information Technology, College of Applied Mathematics, Chengdu, 610225, China
> bSichuan University, School of Mathematics, Chengdu, 610065, China
> cHong Kong Polytechnic University, Department of Computing, Hong Kong, 999077, China
> dSouthwest Petroleum University, College of Science, Chengdu, 610500, Sichuan, China

Abstract 

Recovering compact explicit solutions from neural approximations is chal-lenging when imperfect teacher data guide both symbolic topology search and coefficient estimation. We present DeSyR, a decoupled symbolic recov-ery framework for differential equations. A physics-informed neural network guides repeated searches to construct candidate topologies with provisional constants. Once a topology is fixed, its coefficients are refined solely from the governing equation and prescribed constraints, after which the refined can-didates undergo gated selection and verification. For linear fixed-topology parameterizations, we characterize teacher-error inheritance and show that finite-weight mixed data–physics fitting retains an O(β−1) teacher-dependent contribution when the teacher error has a nonzero projection onto the model space. Under well-posedness, representability, zero-residual attainment, and discrete determinacy, physics-only refinement conditionally recovers the exact coefficients; for nonlinear parameterizations, the corresponding identifiability and convergence guarantees are local. DeSyR is evaluated on 15 differential-equation problems across 18 configurations covering high-order, space–time, multidimensional, nonlinear, and coupled systems. A candidate-level audit yields a 99.23% convergence rate among free-parameter refits, while every   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: junguo0407@cuit.edu.cn (Jun Guo) arXiv:2609.00530v1 [cs.LG] 1 Sep 2026

selected refinement involving free coefficients converges. Configuration-level median refined relative L2 errors are 2.31 × 10 −14 or lower. In same-topology comparisons with strictly positive errors before and after refinement, refine-ment reduces the error by eight to fourteen orders of magnitude. Within the tested representable settings, these results indicate that an approximate neural teacher can guide topology discovery without imposing its error scale on the final recovered coefficients, provided that a target-capable topology is retained and physics-only refinement converges. 

Keywords: symbolic regression, physics-informed neural networks, differential equations, symbolic solution recovery, physics-informed coefficient refinement 

1. Introduction 

Numerical methods are standard tools for solving differential equations in science and engineering. Finite-difference, finite-element, and spectral methods provide well-established discretization techniques with solid theo-retical foundations and broad practical applicability [1, 2, 3]. More recently, neural methods have emerged as an alternative for representing solutions as continuous functions. Deep Galerkin and Deep Ritz methods approximate individual solution fields, whereas DeepONet and Fourier neural operators learn mappings between function spaces [4, 5, 6, 7]. Although these meth-ods can be numerically effective, their solutions are typically represented implicitly, either through discrete degrees of freedom or network parameters. When a solution admits a compact explicit representation, recovering such a representation can facilitate interpretation, differentiation, and reuse in subsequent analysis or computation. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) provide a useful framework for approximating solutions to differential equations by enforcing the gov-erning equations and prescribed constraints during training, without requir-ing labeled solution data in the interior domain [8, 9]. Once trained, a PINN defines a continuous approximation that can be evaluated at arbi-trary points in the domain. Its accuracy, however, remains strongly de-pendent on the optimization process and can be affected by loss imbalance, spectral bias, and difficulties associated with stiff or multiscale problems [10, 11, 12, 13]. Several complementary mitigation strategies have therefore been developed, including adaptive reweighting of governing-equation resid-2ual and constraint losses, residual-based refinement of collocation points, ar-chitectural and activation-function modifications, and spatial or space–time domain decomposition [10, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Nevertheless, a PINN may cap-ture the overall form of the solution while still exhibiting errors in quantities such as amplitudes, frequencies, offsets, or other coefficients. Moreover, the resulting solution remains implicit in the network parameters rather than being available as an explicit analytical expression. Symbolic regression provides a means of recovering explicit analytical ex-pressions from numerical solution data. Given a prescribed set of variables, constants, and operators, it searches for compact expressions that approxi-mate the target samples [18, 19, 20]. The search is conducted over a com-binatorial expression space whose size grows rapidly with expression com-plexity, while the prescribed operator set determines the class of admissible expressions [21, 22]. In most symbolic-regression procedures, the coefficients of a candidate expression are estimated from the same data used to guide the search over expression structure. When these data are generated by an approximate neural solution, errors in the teacher can therefore propagate into the estimated coefficients. Consequently, the recovered expression may have the correct, or nearly correct, functional structure while its numerical coefficients remain inaccurate. Existing approaches that combine symbolic regression with neural or physics-based solution information can be broadly grouped into three main categories. The first fits symbolic expressions to network-generated samples and subsequently applies pruning, compression, or simplification, as in Pruned-DPA [23], SymTorch [24], and related PINN-to-symbolic pipelines for nonlinear PDEs [25, 26, 27]. In these methods, numerical coefficients are estimated primarily from teacher data. The second incorporates governing-equation residuals into the symbolic-search objective, such that expression structure and coefficients are optimized jointly using both data and physics. Examples include PISN [28], StruSR [29], and residual- and structure-sensitivity pruning [30]. A data-free counterpart, SES [31], instead optimizes a differentiable symbolic model directly from equation and constraint resid-uals without relying on a neural teacher. The third introduces a partial separation between structure search and coefficient estimation by fixing candidate structures and subsequently re-estimating their coefficients from physical constraints. PR-GPSR [32] follows this strategy, although its search fitness still includes both teacher-data and physics-based terms. Thus, in existing formulations, teacher data may still influence coefficient estimation 3directly, or structure selection and coefficient estimation may remain coupled through a shared objective. This coupling links two distinct tasks: identifying an appropriate sym-bolic structure and estimating the numerical coefficients associated with that structure. The key question is therefore how teacher data and physical infor-mation should be assigned different roles at different stages of the recovery process. Neural teachers provide global information about the solution field and can therefore guide the search over candidate symbolic structures. Once a candidate structure has been fixed, however, its coefficients can instead be re-estimated using the governing equation and prescribed constraints. Exist-ing methods have not fully separated these two stages [23, 28, 29, 31, 32], and the conditions under which coefficients on a fixed structure can be recovered exactly from physical constraints have not been systematically established. To address this gap, we propose DeSyR, a decoupled symbolic recovery framework that assigns distinct roles to data and physics. PINN outputs guide symbolic searches that generate candidate topologies with provisional fitted constants. Once a topology is fixed, its coefficients are refined using an objective constructed solely from the governing equation and prescribed constraints. By separating topology proposal from the final physics-only coefficient-refinement objective, DeSyR avoids using agreement with teacher data as a surrogate for physical consistency. The resulting expressions are then screened using explicit reliability criteria and assessed through verifica-tion residuals for the governing problem. This work makes three main contributions. First, we introduce DeSyR, an objective-level decoupled framework for symbolic solution recovery. A PINN teacher guides repeated symbolic searches to construct candidate topologies and provides provisional initializa-tions for their coefficients. Once an expression tree is selected for refinement, its topology is frozen, and its eligible coefficients are re-estimated exclusively from the governing equation and prescribed constraints. Gated selection and verification residuals are then used to identify and assess the final explicit expression. This design prevents teacher-data fitting errors from directly entering the final coefficient-refinement objective. Second, we develop a fixed-topology theory that characterizes how the choice of coefficient-estimation objective affects recovery. For linear parameterizations, we quantify the inheritance of teacher error and show that a finite-weight mixed data–physics objective retains an O(β−1) teacher-dependent contribution when the teacher error has a nonzero projection onto 4the fixed model space. Under well-posedness, representability, zero-residual attainability, and a determining collocation-residual map, physics-only refinement conditionally recovers the exact coefficients. For nonlinear parameterizations, the corresponding results are local and explicitly char-acterize the roles of identifiability, conditioning, and initialization. These guarantees apply only to fixed-topology coefficient recovery and do not imply guarantees for topology discovery or global nonlinear convergence. Third, we evaluate DeSyR on 15 differential-equation problems across 18 configurations spanning high-order, space–time, multidimensional, nonlinear, and coupled systems. A candidate-level audit shows a 99.23% convergence rate among free-parameter refits. Every selected refinement involving free co-efficients converges, whereas candidates without free coefficients remain un-changed. At the configuration level, the median refined relative L2 errors do not exceed 2.31 ×10 −14 . In same-topology comparisons for cases with nonzero errors both before and after refinement, physics-only refinement reduces the errors by eight to fourteen orders of magnitude. Additional studies inves-tigate candidate-pool coverage, objective choice, initialization, local iden-tifiability, operator-library misspecification and enrichment, candidate-level refinement behavior, sensitivity to perturbations in prescribed constraints, selection gates, and computational cost, providing controlled evidence for the mechanisms underlying the proposed framework. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the symbolic recovery problem and defines the admissible expression space. Section 3 presents the three-stage DeSyR framework. Section 4 develops the fixed-topology theory of coefficient refinement. Section 5 presents the numerical experiments, including mechanism controls and diagnostic studies. Section 6 discusses the methodological implications and limitations of the framework, and Section 7 concludes the paper. 

2. Problem formulation 

2.1. Governing problem and scope 

Given a forward differential problem with a known governing equation and prescribed boundary or initial conditions, we seek to recover a compact explicit representation of its solution field. Let u denote the solution field, and let x ∈ Ω ⊂ Rd denote the independent variables. For time-dependent problems, we write x = ( x1, . . . , x ds , t ) with d = ds + 1 ; for steady problems, 5the time coordinate is omitted. Let Γc denote the set on which the prescribed constraints are imposed. The forward problem is written as 

N [u]( x) = f (x), x ∈ Ω,

Bℓ[u]( x) = gℓ(x), x ∈ Γc,ℓ , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L c. (1) Here, N denotes the governing differential operator. For each constraint com-ponent ℓ, Bℓ denotes the corresponding constraint operator on Γc,ℓ , and gℓ

denotes the prescribed constraint data. The constraints may include Dirich-let, Neumann, or initial conditions, and both N and Bℓ may be nonlinear. We write Γc = ∪Lc

> ℓ=1

Γc,ℓ , B = ( B1, . . . , BLc ), and g = ( g1, . . . , g Lc ). The problem data are collected as 

P = (Ω , Γc, N , B, f, g ). (2) Throughout the paper, we adopt the following well-posedness assumption. 

Assumption 2.1. (Well-posedness; A1.) Problem P admits a unique clas-sical solution in the solution class under consideration, denoted by u⋆.The problem considered here is distinct from two related tasks. First, it is not governing-equation discovery [33, 34, 35]: the operator N is known and constrains the recovered expression rather than being inferred. Second, the objective is not to improve the neural solver itself, but to recover an explicit expression using a fixed neural approximation together with the pre-scribed governing problem. Coupled fields are searched separately and then refined and selected jointly under the shared governing system, as described in Section 3.5. The remainder of this section focuses on scalar fields. 

2.2. Admissible symbolic representation 

Expressions are built from a prescribed operator set O [20, 36]. For each problem, O is specified before symbolic search as part of the problem config-uration and is kept fixed throughout recovery; DeSyR does not adapt or infer this library during search. The use of problem-specific function libraries is standard in symbolic regression [33, 28, 32, 29]. This choice plays the role of an ansatz specification in classical analysis: the operator library defines the available functional primitives, while the structure search constructs candi-date expressions from these primitives [32]. 

Definition 2.1. (Structural complexity.) A symbolic expression is repre-sented as an expression tree. Leaves are terminals, including independent 6variables, numerical constants, and problem parameters when present. In-ternal nodes are operators: a unary operator, such as sine or exponential, acts on one subexpression, whereas a binary operator, such as addition or multiplication, acts on two subexpressions. The complexity of an expres-sion is the total number of nodes in its tree. We distinguish the raw search complexity Csearch , evaluated on the unsimplified tree returned by symbolic regression, from the final complexity Cfinal , evaluated after coefficient refine-ment and the Stage-B algebraic simplification together with any accepted Stage-C cleaning. The former is used in the Pareto search, whereas the lat-ter is used for Stage-C complexity selection and for reporting the recovered expression. 

Definition 2.2. (Admissible expression space.) Let S(O) denote the set of all expression trees formed from terminals, including independent variables, numerical constants, and problem parameters when present, and from oper-ators in O according to their arities. Each tree is required to be defined on 

Ω and to have the regularity required by N and the Bℓ. Given a complexity bound Cmax , the admissible expression space is 

S(O, C max ) = {s ∈ S (O) : Csearch (s) ≤ Cmax } . (3) The bound Cmax limits the trees explored during structure search. Numerical evaluation further requires the expression and all derivatives needed by the operators to take finite values on the discrete point sets. This finite-value check is a necessary numerical screening step and does not establish regularity over the entire domain. An admissible expression is described by a topology and a set of numerical coefficients. The topology T specifies the tree structure, including the vari-ables, operators, positions of numerical constants, and their arrangement, but not the numerical values assigned to the constant nodes. The coeffi-cient vector a ∈ Rp collects these numerical values, and the corresponding parameterized expression is written sT (·; a). This representation separates the discrete topology from the continuous coefficient vector that can be re-estimated while the topology remains fixed. Symbolic recovery seeks an explicit expression usym in S(O, C max ). If 

u⋆ ∈ S (O, C max ), the target is exact symbolic recovery, meaning functional equality with u⋆ within the solution class rather than equality of expression trees. If u⋆ /∈ S (O, C max ), the target is instead a compact admissible expres-sion with small governing-equation and constraint residuals. In both cases, 7the expression must be differentiable to the order required by the governing operator and evaluable without requiring retention of a neural-network rep-resentation. One important source of non-representability is operator-library misspecification, which is examined in Section 5.4.5. 

2.3. Physical consistency and verification measures 

Evaluation of a recovered expression requires reference-free measures of physical consistency, together with quantities for final reporting. 

Definition 2.3. (Measures of physical consistency.) For any expression s,its agreement with the prescribed problem is measured by two normalized residuals. The governing-equation residual is 

Er(s) = 

 1

|Ω|

Z

> Ω

|N [s]( x) − f (x)|2 dx

1/2

, (4) and the constraint residual is 

Ec(s) = 

" LcX

> ℓ=1

ωℓ

μℓ(Γ c,ℓ )

Z

> Γc,ℓ

∥B ℓ[s]( x) − gℓ(x)∥22 dμℓ(x)

#1/2

. (5) We assume 0 < |Ω| < ∞ and 0 < μ ℓ(Γ c,ℓ ) < ∞ for every constraint compo-nent. The weights satisfy ωℓ > 0 and P 

> ℓ

ωℓ = 1 , so that every constraint component contributes to the measure. The measure μℓ is chosen according to the constraint set: surface (Hausdorff) measure for boundary and initial manifolds, and counting measure for isolated point constraints. All benchmarks considered in this work are nondimensional, so their resid-ual components can be aggregated directly. For dimensional applications with heterogeneous constraint units, the residual components should first be nondimensionalized or scaled by prescribed component-specific factors. Equations (4) and (5) define continuous, reference-solution-free measures of physical consistency. Their discrete verification counterparts are defined in Section 3.4, where the corresponding point sets and weights are specified explicitly. By contrast, the coefficient-refinement objective is an unnormal-ized weighted sum of squared pointwise residuals. It is used solely to enforce the governing equation and prescribed constraints during optimization, with its point allocation and weights controlling their relative numerical emphasis. Its value is therefore not interpreted as, or reported as, an empirical estimate of the normalized verification measures in (4)–(5). 8Definition 2.4. (Verification quantities and complexity.) A recovered ex-pression usym is characterized by its physical-consistency measures Er(usym )

and Ec(usym ), together with its final structural complexity Cfinal (usym ). In numerical evaluation, the physical-consistency measures are represented by the discrete verification residuals defined in Section 3.4. These quantities do not constitute the complete candidate-selection rule: Stage C also applies convergence-eligibility, teacher-compatibility, and physics-equivalence gates before complexity-based selection. When a manufactured or otherwise known reference solution is available, its pointwise values are used only for post hoc computation of the relative 

L2 error. In a manufactured problem, the reference solution may be used to define the prescribed problem data during benchmark construction, but its values are not supplied as PINN supervision and are not used for checkpoint selection, structure search, candidate selection, or coefficient refinement. 

3. The DeSyR framework 

DeSyR separates topology proposal from the final coefficient-refinement objective. Teacher samples are used to propose candidate topologies, fit provisional search-stage constants, and assess candidate compatibility after refinement. The coefficients on each frozen topology are then re-estimated using an objective constructed solely from the governing equation and pre-scribed constraints. Reference-solution values are not used in these three stages; for manufactured benchmarks, an analytic reference may neverthe-less be used to define the forcing and prescribed data before recovery and is used afterward only for error evaluation. The same division of roles ex-tends to coupled multi-field problems, where candidate groups are refined and selected jointly. Figure 1 provides an overview of this division of roles. Its five pro-cess blocks separate teacher construction, sampling, symbolic search, coeffi-cient refinement, and selection with verification. The physics-refit block em-phasizes the defining operation in DeSyR: the symbolic topology is frozen, while the provisional constants inherited from teacher-guided search are re-estimated using only the governing equation and prescribed constraints. 9A1 PINN teacher A2 Teacher sampling A3 Symbolic search B Physics refit C Selection & verification                            

> Known differential problem
> [u] = f,[u] = g
> Physics-informed training
> PINN
> PINN approximation
> xuθ(x)
> Trained PINN
> uθ(x)
> Fixed structure-search set
> Teacher evaluation
> xi↦uθ(xi)
> Structure samples
> S= {( xi,uθ(xi))}
> Fixed expression space
> and complexity budget Cmax
> Kindependent symbolic searches
> Pareto pooling
> Candidate pool
> = Pool K(Pareto 1, …, Pareto K)
> Freeze topology; promote constants
> asearch
> →aref
> 
> Physics-only objective
> refit (a) = eq (a) + λrefit
> ccon (a)
> no teacher-data term
> Refined candidates
> s(x;a⋆)
> Eligible
> finite and converged
> Compatible
> teacher agreement
> Equivalent
> Φphys tolerance
> Simple
> minimum C(s)
> Explicit expression
> usym (x)
> verification residuals: Req ,Rcon
> +
> sin ××
> ax
> exp c
> ×
> bt

Figure 1: Information flow in DeSyR. Stage A uses samples from a frozen PINN teacher to construct a pooled set of candidate symbolic topologies. Stage B freezes each topology and re-estimates its constants with a physics-only objective. Stage C applies convergence-eligibility, teacher-compatibility, physics-equivalence, and complexity gates, then reports verification residuals for the selected explicit expression. 

3.1. The search–refinement decoupling principle 

DeSyR divides symbolic recovery into three stages. Stage A uses teacher samples to generate candidate topologies and provisional coefficients. Stage B freezes each candidate topology and re-estimates its coefficients using an objective constructed solely from the governing equation and prescribed con-straints. Stage C selects the final expression from the refined candidate pool. This workflow can be summarized as Stage A (search): P = Pool K (Pareto 1, . . . , Pareto K ) ,

Stage B (refinement): aopt 

T ∈ arg min 

a Jrefit (a), (T , asearch 

T ) ∈ P ,

Stage C (selection): ( bT , ba) = Gate (T , ˆaT ) : ( T , asearch 

T ) ∈ P .

(6) Here, Pareto k denotes up to five representative candidates selected from the empirical Pareto front returned by the k-th symbolic search according to the Stage-A retention rule; asearch 

T denotes the provisional coefficients fitted to topology T from teacher samples, and aopt 

T denotes an ideal minimizer of the physics-only objective, whereas ˆaT denotes the numerical solution retained from the multi-start procedure. The operator Pool K merges the Pareto candidates retained from K independent symbolic searches into the candidate pool P. In Stage B, each candidate tree is kept fixed, and Jrefit 

10 is formed only from the governing equation and prescribed constraints; it contains no teacher-data term and re-estimates only the numerical constants attached to the tree. In Stage C, the gate applies the convergence-eligibility, teacher-compatibility, physics-equivalence, and complexity rules in sequence to select the final expression. Table 1 summarizes this separation by indicating where each information source is used in the DeSyR workflow.                    

> Table 1: Information-source usage in DeSyR.
> Source Search Refinement Selection Verification Post hoc evaluation Teacher samples DS✓–Teacher compatibility ––Governing equation and constraints –✓Physics equivalence Residuals –Reference-solution values ––––Rel. L2error

Principle 3.1 (Search–refinement decoupling) . Within the structure-search objective, teacher samples provide the only fitting signal; no governing-equation or constraint residual is included. The same teacher samples are used after refinement to assess candidate compatibility. The search stage jointly proposes topologies and provisional constants. For each frozen tree, the constants are then re-estimated by a physics-only objective containing no teacher-data term. Final selection is performed by explicit gates over the refined candidate pool, rather than by a single mixed teacher–physics objective that jointly determines the final expression. 

This separation has two direct consequences. First, physical residuals do not enter the combinatorial symbolic-search objective; candidate generation is driven by teacher fit and expression complexity. Second, teacher fitting does not enter the Stage-B objective. The search provides teacher-fitted can-didates and initial coefficient values, whereas the refinement re-estimates the constants without changing the expression trees. For nonlinear parameteri-zations, the stationary point reached by the refinement may still depend on the initial values through the basin of attraction. Section 4 gives the cor-responding conditional statement of this objective-level decoupling for the fixed-topology coefficient problem. 11 For the representable setting targeted by exact symbolic recovery, the ef-fectiveness of this procedure depends on the following operational conditions, each of which is associated with a checkable component of the implementa-tion. • Condition C1 (Teacher guidance adequacy). The teacher-based ranking and compatibility signals are sufficiently informative that, whenever the pooled candidate set contains a topology capable of representing the target solution, at least one such topology remains admissible under the Stage-C teacher-compatibility gate after refine-ment. The implementation seeks to support this condition through physics-validation checkpoint selection in Section 3.2 and by retaining multiple Pareto-optimal candidates from the K independent searches. • Condition C2 (Candidate coverage). The candidate pool contains at least one topology capable of representing the target solution. This condition is addressed by the K independent symbolic searches and Pareto pooling in Section 3.2. • Condition C3 (Refinement convergence). For a topology enter-ing Stage B, the fixed-topology minimization terminates with a finite converged solution. This condition is assessed using the convergence status defined in Section 3.3. Together, C1–C3 identify three operational conditions that support the exact-recovery pathway in the representable setting. They concern, respec-tively, the adequacy of the teacher-based ranking and compatibility signals, the coverage of the symbolic candidate pool, and the successful convergence of at least one target-capable fixed-topology refinement. They are not suf-ficient conditions for exact symbolic recovery; the additional fixed-topology requirements are analyzed in Section 4. Their empirical behavior is examined in Sections 5.4.1, 5.5, and 5.4.4. 

3.2. Stage A: teacher-guided structure search 

Stage A generates candidate topologies from samples of a trained teacher. We use a physics-informed neural network (PINN) as the teacher because it can be trained from the governing equation and prescribed constraints in (1), without requiring labeled solution values in the interior domain, and can be evaluated at arbitrary points after training [8, 9]. The PINN represents the 12 solution through a differentiable neural network uθ and is trained by minimiz-ing empirical residuals of the governing equation and prescribed constraints at collocation points. The corresponding residual components are 

Lr(θ) = 1

N prN prX

> i=1

|N [uθ]( xr,p i ) − f (xr,p i )|2 ,

Lc,ℓ (θ) = 1

N pc,ℓ N pc,ℓ 

X

> j=1

Bℓ[uθ]( xc,p j,ℓ ) − gℓ(xc,p j,ℓ ) 22 , ℓ = 1 , . . . , L c.

(7) where xr,p i denote the interior collocation points and xc,p j,ℓ denote the collo-cation points associated with the ℓ-th constraint component. The PINN training objective is 

LPINN (θ) = λPINN  

> r

Lr(θ) + 

> Lc

X

> ℓ=1

λPINN  

> c,ℓ

Lc,ℓ (θ). (8) The weights are nonnegative and fixed by the problem configuration, and remain unchanged throughout training. The constraint terms encode the boundary or initial information required to determine the solution. The per-component weights are specified to balance the relative numerical influence of the governing-equation residual and the individual constraint residuals during training. The loss in (8) is first minimized with Adam and then further optimized with L-BFGS. Both optimizers use the same fixed Hammersley collocation points generated by DeepXDE [37]. Training produces a sequence of checkpoints, and the selected checkpoint defines the teacher used for structure search. To avoid using reference-solution pointwise values, checkpoint selection is based on a physics-validation score. Let vi(θ) denote the unweighted mean-square error of the i-th validation component. The nval components consist of the interior residual and the individual constraint residuals. The interior validation component is evaluated on domain points independent of the training col-location points, whereas the constraint components are evaluated on the fixed prescribed constraint points. The interior validation points are also independent of the structure-search samples. Each component is scaled by 

bi = max vi(θ(0) ), 1 , (9) 13 where θ(0) denotes the initial network parameters. The constant 1 prevents a component whose initial value is close to zero from dominating the score because of round-off effects. The physics-validation score is 

Sval (θ) = 

"

1

nval 

> nval

X

> i=1

vi(θ)

bi

2#1/2

. (10) The teacher is chosen as the checkpoint with the smallest Sval . This physics-based rule does not use reference-solution pointwise values and is intended to support Condition C1 without introducing such values into teacher selection. After selection, the teacher is frozen. Its samples are used to generate structure-search candidates and, after refinement, to assess candidate com-patibility; they do not enter the physics-only refinement objective or the verification residuals. The structure-search point set XS is generated by uniform sampling for problems with a single independent variable and by Latin hypercube sampling when the independent-variable domain is multi-dimensional. The resulting point set is kept fixed throughout recovery. By construction, XS is disjoint from the refinement points used in Section 3.3 and the interior verification points used in Section 3.4. Thus, teacher samples serve as the fitting signal for structure search and the compatibility signal in Stage C, but do not enter coefficient refinement or residual verification. The structure-search sample set is 

DS =   xSi , u θ(xSi ) NS 

> i=1

, (11) namely, the values of the frozen teacher uθ evaluated on XS = {xSi }NS

> i=1

. Stage A solves the bicriteria problem 

minimize  

> s∈S (O,C max )

(ES (s), Csearch (s)) , (12) where the teacher-fit loss is 

ES (s) = 1

NSNSX

> i=1

s(xSi ) − uθ(xSi ) 2 . (13) The candidate s includes the provisional constants fitted during symbolic search. Rather than fixing a scalarization weight a priori, the search returns an empirical Pareto front representing the trade-off between teacher-fit loss 14 and candidate complexity. The bicriteria search objective in (12) contains no governing-equation or constraint residual term. Accordingly, in DeSyR, the constants fitted during this stage are treated as provisional search-stage coefficients rather than as physics-refined coefficients. Symbolic search is performed with PySR [19] by optimizing the teacher-fit loss and search complexity in (12). The operator set O and complexity bound 

Cmax are fixed for each problem as described in Section 2.2, and each search returns an empirical Pareto front. Because symbolic search is stochastic, Condition C2 is formulated at the level of the retained pooled candidate set rather than for any individual search run. DeSyR performs K independent searches and retains up to five representative candidates from each empirical Pareto front: the simplest candidate, the candidate with the best teacher fit, candidates associated with major loss-improvement knees, and coverage posi-tions along the front. The retained candidates are merged into the candidate pool P. Each candidate consists of a topology and teacher-fitted provisional coefficients asearch  

> T

; these coefficients are used only to initialize the physics refinement in Section 3.3. 

3.3. Stage B: physics-based coefficient refinement 

Stage B processes each candidate in the pool independently. Following the topology–coefficient decomposition introduced in Section 2.2, the refinement modifies only the numerical constants attached to a candidate tree. The expression tree itself remains fixed: its variables, operators, and connections are unchanged. The selected free constants, represented by the coefficient vector a defined in Section 2.2, are then re-estimated using only the governing equation and prescribed constraints. 

Definition 3.1 (Constant parameterization) . Consider a candidate expres-sion with a frozen tree. A numerical constant in the tree is treated as a free parameter if it satisfies the following criteria: it does not appear as the exponent of a power, its absolute value is at least 10 −10 , its absolute value differs from 1 by at least 10 −10 , and it is not a duplicate of another selected constant within floating-point tolerance. Specifically, a newly encountered constant c′ is treated as a duplicate of a previously selected constant c when 

|c′ − c| < 10 −9 max {1, |c′|} , in which case their occurrences are tied to the same parameter. If the number of distinct eligible constants exceeds the configured param-eter bound of 16, only those with the largest absolute values are retained 15 as free parameters. This bound is applied per field in coupled problems. The selected constants are ordered by decreasing absolute value and denoted by a = ( a1, . . . , a p). They are replaced in the tree by parameter symbols, yielding the parameterized expression ˆs(·; a). If no constant satisfies the eli-gibility criteria, then a is empty and the candidate remains unchanged during refinement. These rules define the coefficient space optimized in Stage B. Conse-quently, exact coefficient recovery requires not only a target-capable expres-sion tree but also representability of the target coefficients within the re-sulting fixed-topology parameterization. This requirement is formalized in Assumption 4.2. For each candidate, let Xfr = {xr,f i }N fr 

> i=1

denote the interior refinement points, let Xfc,ℓ denote the refinement points for the ℓ-th constraint com-ponent, and let N fc = PLc 

> ℓ=1

N fc,ℓ . The physics-refinement objective is the unnormalized pointwise sum of squared residuals 

Jrefit (a) =  

> Nfr

X

> i=1

N [ˆ s(·; a)]( xr,f i ) − f (xr,f i ) 2

+ λrefit 

> cLc

X 

> ℓ=1
> Nfc,ℓ

X

> j=1

Bℓ[ˆ s(·; a)]( xc,f j,ℓ ) − gℓ(xc,f j,ℓ ) 22

.

(14) Here, ˆs denotes the parameterized expression. The constraint weight is fixed at λrefit  

> c

= 100 for all problems. Interior residuals therefore have pointwise weight 1, whereas constraint residuals have pointwise weight λrefit  

> c

;no normalization by the number of points is applied. The objective in (14) contains only the governing operator N , the constraint operators Bℓ, the prescribed data f and gℓ, and the refinement points. It contains neither a teacher-data term nor a reference-solution term. For a candidate topology T , Stage B targets the fixed-topology optimiza-tion problem 

aopt  

> T

∈ arg min  

> a

Jrefit (a). (15) When the minimum is attained, aopt  

> T

denotes an ideal global minimizer. In practice, because the fixed-topology problem may be nonconvex in a, the optimizer is initialized from multiple starting points, and the best numerical solution found is retained and denoted by ˆaT .16 The initial values consist of the teacher-fitted provisional coefficients 

asearch  

> T

and several multiplicative perturbations around them. Each initial-ization is passed to the nonlinear least-squares solver [38]. Among all runs that return a finite objective value, the solution with the smallest final objective is retained together with its convergence status. If no run returns a finite result, the candidate is marked as non-convergent. Convergence is declared when the change in the objective, the parameter-step size, or the first-order optimality measure falls below a tolerance of 10 −8. A run that reaches the evaluation limit without satisfying any of these criteria is marked as non-convergent. The recorded status is used to assess the convergence requirement in Condition C3. The theoretical analysis in Section 4 concerns the fixed-topology coeffi-cient problem in (14), in which only the constants associated with the frozen expression tree are re-estimated. Algebraic simplification and the optional removal of numerically negligible terms are post-processing operations and do not modify this optimization problem; the latter is governed by the ac-ceptance criteria in Section 3.4. 

3.4. Stage C: gated selection and verification 

Stage C applies checked post-refinement cleaning, selects the final expres-sion from the resulting candidate pool, and reports its verification quantities. The cleaning step may reduce the symbolic form by removing numerically negligible additive terms, but it does not refit the coefficients. After this post-processing, selection acts only on the existing candidates and does not further modify their expressions. Candidates may differ in topology, refined coefficients, convergence status, teacher agreement, physical residuals, and final complexity. These quantities play different roles, so DeSyR does not collapse them into a single aggregate score. Instead, selection is performed by a sequence of explicit gates. The first gate is convergence eligibility . Eligibility requires both the ex-pression and the quantities used for selection to be finite. If at least one eli-gible candidate satisfies the convergence criterion in Section 3.3, the compar-ison is restricted to converged candidates. Otherwise, finite non-convergent candidates are retained only as a diagnostic fallback, and the selected ex-pression retains a non-convergent status. The second gate is teacher compatibility . Teacher samples provide the structural signal used in Stage A. A refined expression whose predictions deviate substantially from the teacher is no longer supported by this signal 17 Algorithm 1 Fixed-topology physics-only coefficient refinement 

Require: candidate expression sT , provisional coefficients asearch  

> T

, problem data P, and refinement points 

Ensure: refined expression and convergence status  

> 1:

Freeze the topology T and construct the parameterized expression ˆs(·; a)

according to Definition 3.1  

> 2:

if a is empty then  

> 3:

Set the convergence status to true; no coefficient optimization is re-quired  

> 4:

return the simplified expression and its convergence status  

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

Construct the physics-only objective Jrefit (a) in (14)  

> 7:

Generate a set of initial values from asearch  

> T

and its multiplicative pertur-bations  

> 8:

for each initial value do  

> 9:

Compute a local least-squares solution and its convergence status  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

if no run produces a finite objective value then  

> 12:

return sT with a non-convergent status  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

Retain the finite solution ˆaT with the smallest final objective value and its associated convergence status  

> 15:

Substitute ˆaT into ˆs(·; a) and apply algebraic simplification  

> 16:

return the resulting expression and its convergence status 18 and is excluded from the shortlist. For an expression s, the relative error with respect to the teacher is evaluated on the structure-search points: 

εT (s) = 

"P NS 

> i=1

s(xSi ) − uθ(xSi ) 2

PNS 

> i=1

|uθ(xSi )|2

#1/2

. (16) Let εT, min denote the minimum teacher error among the convergence-eligible candidates. The teacher-compatible shortlist consists of the candidates sat-isfying 

εT (s) ≤ 3 εT, min + 10 −8. (17) The third gate is physics equivalence . After fixed-topology refinement, several eligible candidates may attain residuals at or near machine precision. In this regime, small differences in residual values often reflect round-off rather than a meaningful difference in physical consistency. To avoid selecting a more complex expression solely because of numerical noise, DeSyR groups physically indistinguishable candidates before applying the complexity rule. To preserve the constraint-to-interior residual-amplitude scaling induced by the Stage-B refinement weight, the physics-selection score is defined on the refinement points as 

Φphys (s) = ρr(s) + pλrefit  

> c

ρc(s), (18) where ρr and ρc are the root-mean-square interior and constraint residuals on the refinement points. Let Φphys ,min denote the minimum score on the teacher-compatible shortlist. The physics-equivalent class consists of candi-dates satisfying 

Φphys (s) ≤ 1.05 Φ phys ,min + 10 −10 . (19) Before the gates are applied, a cleaning proposal removes additive terms whose numerical leading coefficient has magnitude below 10 −8. The proposal is accepted only if the cleaned expression is finite, has lower final complexity, and satisfies Φphys (sclean ) ≤ 1.05 Φ phys (sraw ) + 10 −10 ,εT (sclean ) ≤ 3 εT (sraw ) + 10 −8. (20) Otherwise, the unpruned Stage-B expression is retained. This acceptance check uses no reference-solution values and does not alter the Stage-B coef-ficient objective. 19 The fourth gate is complexity preference . Within the physics-equivalent class, the candidate with the smallest final complexity is selected. If multi-ple candidates have the same complexity, ties are resolved by teacher error, physics-selection score, and search seed, in that order. After selection, the verification quantities of the final expression are re-ported for assessment and do not enter the preceding gates. The interior residual is evaluated on domain points that are independent of the teacher samples and are used in neither structure search nor coefficient refinement: 

Req =

"

1

N vrN vrX

> i=1

|N [usym ]( xr,v i ) − f (xr,v i )|2

#1/2

,Rcon =



> Lc

X

> ℓ=1

ωfℓ

N fc,ℓ N fc,ℓ 

X

> j=1

Bℓ[usym ]( xc,f j,ℓ ) − gℓ(xc,f j,ℓ ) 22



> 1/2

.

(21) Here, ωfℓ = N fc,ℓ /N fc , so that all constraint points have equal weight in Rcon .The constraint residual is evaluated on the prescribed constraint manifolds, which coincide with the constraint point sets used during refinement. Thus, the interior residual provides the out-of-sample domain verification, while the constraint residual verifies consistency with the prescribed boundary or initial data. Unlike the physics-selection score in (18), Rcon does not in-clude the refinement weight λrefit  

> c

. The final complexity is evaluated after the Stage-B algebraic simplification and any accepted Stage-C cleaning, using the counting convention of Definition 2.1. When a reference solution is available, it may be used beforehand to con-struct the prescribed forcing and constraint data for manufactured problems. Its pointwise field values are otherwise excluded from the recovery procedure and are reserved for post hoc error reporting. The relative L2 error is com-puted as 

εL2 =

"PN vr 

> i=1

|upred (xr,v i ) − uref (xr,v i )|2

PN vr 

> i=1

|uref (xr,v i )|2

#1/2

, (22) where upred = usym for the selected symbolic expression, and upred = uθ

when the PINN teacher is evaluated as a baseline. In the manufactured-solution benchmarks, the reference solution is the unique classical solution 

u⋆ in Assumption 2.1. 20 Algorithm 2 The DeSyR framework, single-field case 

Require: problem data P, operator set O, complexity bound Cmax , and either a teacher uθ or a teacher-training configuration 

Ensure: final expression usym and verification quantities  

> 1:

if no teacher is provided then  

> 2:

Train a PINN and select the checkpoint by the physics-validation score in (10)  

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

Generate the structure-search samples DS 

> 5:

Run K independent symbolic searches, retain up to five representative Pareto candidates by the Stage-A retention rule, and merge them into P 

> 6:

for each candidate in P do  

> 7:

Apply Algorithm 1 for fixed-topology physics refinement  

> 8:

Apply the checked post-refinement cleaning in Section 3.4  

> 9:

Record the refined expression, convergence status, residuals, and fail-ure reason if any  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Apply the convergence-eligibility, teacher-compatibility, physics-equivalence, and complexity gates in order  

> 12:

Select the final expression usym  

> 13:

Compute verification residuals and, when a reference solution is available, the relative L2 error  

> 14:

return usym and its verification quantities 21 3.5. Extension to coupled multi-field systems 

The scalar formulation extends to coupled systems without changing the separation of information across the three stages: teacher data guide the fieldwise topology searches, the coupled governing system determines the coefficients, and selection acts on complete multi-field candidates. Let u⋆ =(u⋆

> 1

, . . . , u ⋆m) denote the unique classical solution, with governing equations 

N [u] = f and prescribed constraints B[u] = g.Stage A searches for the topology of each component uf independently; no coupled-equation residual enters these fieldwise symbolic-search objectives. When recurring exponential structure is detected across fields, the resulting candidate pools are augmented by expressions constructed from the shared factor. Finite, non-duplicate candidates are filtered by fieldwise teacher com-patibility, and a balanced subset spanning teacher fit and expression complex-ity is retained for each field. The Cartesian product of these subsets defines the multi-field candidate groups. Because this product can grow rapidly, a preliminary comparison based on joint physical consistency, mean teacher error, and total complexity restricts joint refinement to a bounded shortlist. At this preliminary stage, joint physical consistency is evaluated using the provisional search-stage coefficients; no joint coefficient refinement has yet been performed. The comparison ranks already generated expressions and does not alter their topologies. The fixed shortlist and screening settings are given in Appendix B. For coupled systems, Stage B is implemented at two resolutions. During screening, each shortlisted group is refined on the reduced screening config-uration under a single coupled physics-only objective formed by assembling the governing-equation and constraint residuals of all fields. Once Stage C identifies the winning topology group, its coefficients are jointly re-estimated on the complete refinement set using the same objective. The coupling is therefore enforced directly during both coefficient-estimation steps rather than approximated through separate fieldwise fits, and no teacher-data term enters either objective. The coupled parameterization also represents ex-ponential rates detected in at least two fields by a common parameter. Arate equal to an integer multiple from one to four of a shared base rate is represented by the corresponding multiple of that parameter, whereas the remaining eligible constants are field-specific. Exact recovery thus addition-ally requires representability within this joint parameterization, as covered by Assumption 4.2. 22 Stage C applies the four selection gates to jointly refined groups. Let εT,f 

denote the teacher error of field f , defined as in (16), and let ρr,k and ρc,ℓ 

denote the root-mean-square residuals of the k-th governing equation and the ℓ-th constraint, respectively. The group-level quantities used for teacher compatibility, physics equivalence, and complexity preference are 

εgrp  

> T

= 1

m

> m

X 

> f=1

εT,f ,

Φgrp phys = 1

neq 

> neq

X

> k=1

ρ2

> r,k

!1/2

+ pλrefit 

> c

1

ncon 

> ncon

X

> ℓ=1

ρ2

> c,ℓ

!1/2

,

Cgrp =

> m

X 

> f=1

Cfinal (sf ).

(23) Here, neq and ncon are the numbers of governing equations and constraint components; the constraint term is omitted when no constraint is prescribed. The arithmetic mean in (23) assigns equal importance to the fieldwise teacher errors. Convergence eligibility is determined by the joint screening refinement status of the entire group. The teacher-compatibility and physics-equivalence thresholds use the same relative and absolute tolerances as in the scalar for-mulation. Within the resulting physics-equivalent class, the topology group with the smallest Cgrp is selected, with ties resolved by the group teacher error and group physics score, in that order. The gates therefore select a multi-field topology group on the basis of the screening-refined candidates rather than a final coefficient vector. After selection, the winning topologies remain frozen while their coefficients are jointly re-estimated on the complete refinement set. This full-set refinement does not reopen the cross-topology competition or reapply the selection gates. Any accepted cleaning is then applied, and the final convergence status, verification quantities, and group complexity are reported for the resulting expressions. Verification is likewise defined for the coupled solution as a whole. When reference fields are available, their values and the corresponding predictions on the verification points are concatenated into vectors Uref and Upred , yield-ing 

εL2 = ∥Upred − Uref ∥2

∥Uref ∥2

. (24) 23 Because this aggregate norm weights field contributions according to their reference magnitudes, fieldwise relative errors are reported alongside it. The coupled equation and constraint residuals are obtained by taking the root mean square of their respective componentwise residuals. 

4. Theoretical analysis 

Fixed-topology refinement reduces symbolic recovery to a continuous coefficient-estimation problem: once the expression tree is frozen, only its nu-merical constants remain to be determined from the governing equation and prescribed constraints. Under well-posedness, representability, zero-residual attainment, and discrete determinacy, the refined expression coincides with the unique classical solution u⋆. This zero-residual solution is independent of the teacher, although the numerical optimization may still depend on the teacher-generated initialization. This section establishes this conditional exact-recovery result and quantifies the coefficient errors inherited under teacher-only and mixed data–physics objectives. 

4.1. Problem setting and assumptions 

For the fixed topology and coefficient parameterization defined in Sec-tion 3.3, the physics-only objective Jrefit gives rise to a continuous coefficient problem. The analysis is stated first for a scalar solution field governed by a scalar equation. Multi-field problems take the same form once the per-equation and per-constraint residuals are assembled into a single block residual vector F. Topology discovery remains subject to the operational conditions C1 and C2 and lies outside the present analysis, while guarantees for nonlinear coefficient optimization are local. Let u be the unknown solution field of problem P, with the notation Ω,

Γc, N , B, f , and g as in Section 2. For a given topology T , the parameter-ized expression is written as s(x; a) with a ∈ Rp. For notational simplicity, boldface is omitted for coefficient vectors throughout this section. 

Assumption 4.1 (Well-posedness) . Problem P has a unique classical solu-tion u⋆.

Assumption 4.2 (Representability) . There exists a⋆ ∈ Rp such that 

s(·; a⋆) = u⋆.24 Let XS = {xSi }NS 

> i=1

be the structure-search point set, let yθ = ( uθ(xSi )) NS

> i=1

denote the teacher values on this set, and define the pointwise teacher error by 

εi = uθ(xSi ) − u⋆(xSi ). (25) The refinement points and the physics-only objective Jrefit are those in (14). Recall that this objective is an unnormalized pointwise sum of squared residuals. Let F(a) ∈ RM denote the corresponding weighted residual vector. Its interior components are 

 N [s(·; a)] − f (xr,f i ), (26) and its constraint components are the entries of 

pλrefit 

> c

 Bℓ[s(·; a)] − gℓ

(xc,f j,ℓ ). (27) The total dimension is 

M = N fr +

> Lc

X

> ℓ=1

N fc,ℓ dℓ, (28) where dℓ is the output dimension of Bℓ. Hence 

Jrefit (a) = ∥F(a)∥22,

Jrefit (a) = 0 ⇐⇒ F(a) = 0 . (29) Vector norms are Euclidean and matrix norms are spectral; σmin denotes the smallest singular value. 

Assumption 4.3 (Zero-residual attainment) . The refinement procedure at-tains a coefficient vector ˆa satisfying Jrefit (ˆ a) = 0 , equivalently F(ˆ a) = 0 .

Assumption 4.4 (Determinacy: injectivity) . The collocation-residual map 

F is injective on an open neighborhood U of a⋆ that contains ˆa.For linear parameterizations, 

s(x; a) = 

> p

X

> j=1

aj φj (x), (30) abbreviated as (L), define the design matrix Φ = ( φj (xSi )) i,j ∈ RNS ×p. If Φ

has full column rank, this condition is abbreviated as (L-rank). If N and each Bℓ are linear in u, abbreviated as (L-op), then 

F(a) = Aa − b, Jrefit (a) = ∥Aa − b∥22, (31) 25 where A and b are determined by the discrete operators, refinement weights, basis functions, and prescribed data f and g. In particular, they are inde-pendent of the teacher. We write A⊤A ≻ 0 as (PD). Table 2 relates the theoretical assumptions and operational conditions used below to their counterparts in the DeSyR framework. 

Table 2: Relationship between theoretical assumptions and framework conditions.         

> Assumption or condition Framework counterpart Assumption 4.1 (Well-posedness) Assumed property of the prescribed problem Pin Section 2 Assumption 4.2 (Representability) C2 specialized to the fixed topology under analysis, together with representability in its Stage-B parameterization Assumption 4.3 (Zero-residual attainment) Strengthening of C3 to exact zero residual Assumption 4.4 (Determinacy) Discrete determinacy condition, outside C1–C3 C1 (Teacher guidance adequacy) Upstream search condition, with no fixed-topology counterpart

Condition C1 acts in the search stage: it affects which topologies enter the candidate pool. It therefore lies upstream of the fixed-topology coefficient problem and has no corresponding assumption in the analysis below. 

4.2. Error inheritance from the teacher 

For a fixed topology, the prediction error can be decomposed into a rep-resentation component, which coefficient optimization cannot remove, and a coefficient component, which measures departure from the best in-topology coefficients. In the representable linear setting, teacher fitting controls the second component through the following inheritance bound. 

Lemma 4.1 (Coefficient-inheritance bound) . Assume (L), (L-rank), and Assumption 4.2. Let ˆaLS = arg min a∈Rp ∥Φa − yθ∥22 be the least-squares fit to the teacher samples. Then 

ˆaLS − a⋆ = (Φ ⊤Φ) −1Φ⊤ε, (32) 

and 

∥ˆaLS − a⋆∥2 ≤ ∥ (Φ ⊤Φ) −1Φ⊤∥2 ∥ε∥2 = ∥ε∥2

σmin (Φ) . (33) 

(Proof in Appendix A.) 

Lemma 4.1 shows that the fitted coefficients equal a⋆ plus the coeffi-cient vector associated with the least-squares projection of the teacher error 26 onto the sampled model space. Unless Φ⊤ε = 0 , the fitted coefficients dif-fer from a⋆, and the inherited error is amplified by 1/σ min (Φ) . The error is not guaranteed to vanish as NS grows: from the finite-sample identity 

ˆaNS − a⋆ = (Φ ⊤Φ/N S )−1(Φ ⊤ε/N S ), if Φ⊤Φ/N S → G ≻ 0 and Φ⊤ε/N S → v,then ˆaNS → a⋆ + G−1v. The bias persists when v̸ = 0 and disappears when 

Φ⊤ε/N S → 0, i.e. when the teacher error becomes asymptotically orthogo-nal to the sampled model space. This mechanism explains why pure teacher fitting can remain at the teacher’s accuracy scale, as observed in the teacher-only results of Section 5.4.3, and directly motivates physics-only refinement. The bound cannot be transferred to nonlinear parameterizations by replacing basis functions with parameter gradients; the local counterpart is Proposi-tion 4.2. 

Lemma 4.2 (Error decomposition) . Assume (L). Let Xv = {xvi }Nv 

> i=1

be an evaluation point set, ˜Φ ∈ RNv ×p with ˜Φij = φj (xvi ), and u⋆v the values of u⋆

on Xv. The following items hold under their individually stated assumptions. 

1. (Under Assumption 4.2.) Assume Assumption 4.2, and write φ(x) = (φ1(x), . . . , φ p(x)) ⊤. For any ˆa ∈ Rp,

s(x; ˆ a) − u⋆(x) = φ(x)⊤(ˆ a − a⋆). (34) 2. (Without Assumption 4.2.) Assume φj ∈ L2(Ω) for j = 1 , . . . , p , and let a† ∈ arg min a∈Rp ∥s(·; a) − u⋆∥L2(Ω) be a best in-topology approxima-tion coefficient. Then 

s(·; ˆ a) − u⋆ = s(·; ˆ a) − s(·; a†) + s(·; a†) − u⋆, (35) 

where the first term is the coefficient error and the second is the repre-sentation error; the latter is independent of the coefficient solver. 

3. (Norm bound.) Let a† be a best in-topology coefficient as defined in item 2. For any ˆa ∈ Rp,

∥ ˜Φˆ a − u⋆v∥2 ≤ ∥ ˜Φa† − u⋆v∥2

| {z }

> representation error

+ ∥ ˜Φ∥2∥ˆa − a†∥2

| {z }

> coefficient error

. (36) 

Under (L-rank) and Assumption 4.2, take a† = a⋆ and ˆa = ˆ aLS : the representation term vanishes, and Lemma 4.1 bounds the coefficient term by ∥ ˜Φ∥2∥ε∥2/σ min (Φ) .

27 (Proof in Appendix A.) 

When Assumption 4.2 holds, the total error is determined entirely by the coefficient gap ˆa − a⋆, which the three routes characterize separately: teacher fitting (Lemma 4.1), mixed objectives (Corollary 4.1), and physics-only re-finement (Proposition 4.1, where the gap is zero). When Assumption 4.2 fails, the topology cannot represent the unique classical solution, and coefficient refinement can reduce only the coefficient component, not the representa-tion component. The same-candidate comparison in Section 5.4.2 applies this decomposition directly: both expressions share the same topology and therefore the same representation-error term. The only changing component is the coefficient error, so the difference between the two recovered expres-sions is attributable to coefficient refinement. Results at machine precision are consistent with Assumption 4.2 for that topology, but do not establish representability analytically. 

4.3. Conditional exact recovery 

Proposition 4.1 (Conditional exact recovery) . Fix the topology, coefficient parameterization, and refinement point set. Suppose Assumptions 4.1–4.4 hold. Then: (i) ˆa = a⋆, and consequently s(·; ˆ a) = u⋆(·).(ii) Conditional on the fixed topology, coefficient parameterization, and re-finement point set, the objective Jrefit and its zero-residual set contain no teacher quantity. Hence the target zero-residual solution is indepen-dent of the teacher, although reaching it numerically may still depend on the teacher-generated initialization. (iii) Under the same fixed-topology setting, teacher information enters the Stage-B optimization only through the initialization a0 = a0(θ). It may affect the basin of attraction and the iteration cost, but not the zero-residual limit ˆa = a⋆ when that limit is attained. (Proof in Appendix A.) 

Beyond well-posedness of the prescribed problem, Proposition 4.1 sepa-rates exact recovery on a fixed topology into three additional requirements: representability (Assumption 4.2), discrete determinacy (Assumption 4.4), and attainment of zero residual (Assumption 4.3). The teacher does not de-termine the zero-residual target once the topology, coefficient parameteriza-tion, and refinement point set are fixed, but it can affect whether the numeri-cal procedure reaches that target through the initialization. The proposition 28 makes no claim about topology search, which remains subject to C1 and C2, and it does not state that every initialization attains zero residual. For example, an initialization that converges to a spurious stationary point with nonzero residual violates Assumption 4.3; see Proposition 4.2. Passing from zero residuals at finitely many refinement points to equal-ity of coefficients requires a determinacy condition. In general, two distinct parameterized expressions can satisfy the same finite set of residual equa-tions, so F(ˆ a) = F(a⋆) = 0 alone does not imply ˆa = a⋆. Injectivity in Assumption 4.4 is therefore used as a convenient sufficient condition, not as a necessary one. Its role can be interpreted as follows. 1. Linear parameterization and linear operators. In this case, F(a) = 

Aa − b is affine, so injectivity is global: Assumption 4.4 ⇐⇒ A has full column rank ⇐⇒ A⊤A ≻ 0, (37) where A is the residual matrix defined in (31). 2. Polynomial parameterizations. For a full univariate polynomial param-eterization of degree d, the number of coefficients is p = d + 1 , so at least M ≥ d + 1 residual rows are needed for full column rank. More generally, a polynomial topology with p free coefficients requires at least 

M ≥ p residual rows. These counts are only necessary: repeated points or operators that reduce the effective polynomial space can still make the residual matrix A rank deficient. 3. Nonlinear analytic families. If DF(a⋆) has full column rank, then one can select p residual components whose Jacobian is nonsingular. The inverse function theorem then gives local injectivity of F near a⋆. This does not exclude another zero-residual coefficient vector outside that neighborhood. 4. Verifiability. In the linear case, global injectivity can be checked di-rectly through the rank of A, equivalently through A⊤A ≻ 0. In the nonlinear case, the numerical Jacobian DF(ˆ a) provides only local iden-tifiability evidence through its rank and conditioning; it cannot certify global injectivity. 

4.4. Finite-weight bias in mixed objectives 

Corollary 4.1 (Teacher bias under a finite physics weight) . Assume (L), (L-rank), (L-op), (PD), and Assumptions 4.1–4.2. Define the mixed data– physics objective 

Jβ

> mix

(a) = ∥Φa − yθ∥22 + β ∥Aa − b∥22, β ∈ (0 , ∞). (38) 29 The teacher term is written in unnormalized form. It equals NS ES , where ES

is the teacher-fit loss defined in (13) ; this positive scaling does not change the minimizer provided that the physics weight is rescaled accordingly. For any finite β > 0, the following statements hold. (a) Uniqueness. The objective Jβ 

> mix

is strictly convex and has the unique minimizer 

ˆa(β) = (Φ ⊤Φ + βA ⊤A)−1(Φ ⊤yθ + βA ⊤b). (39) 

(b) Teacher-error contribution. By (L-op) and Assumptions 4.1–4.2, b =

Aa ⋆. Since yθ = Φ a⋆ + ε,

ˆa(β) − a⋆ = (Φ ⊤Φ + βA ⊤A)−1Φ⊤ε. (40) 

Thus the coefficient bias comes entirely from the teacher error ε. In contrast, the physics-only minimizer is 

ˆapure = ( A⊤A)−1A⊤b = a⋆. (41) 

(c) Large-weight asymptotics. As β → ∞ ,

ˆa(β) − a⋆ = β−1(A⊤A)−1Φ⊤ε + O(β−2) = O(β−1). (42) 

In particular, ˆa(β) → a⋆.(d) Teacher-fit limit. As β → 0+,

ˆa(β) → (Φ ⊤Φ) −1Φ⊤yθ = ˆ aLS , (43) 

which is the teacher fit in Lemma 4.1. (e) Nonzero finite-weight bias. For any finite β > 0,

ˆa(β) − a⋆̸ = 0 ⇐⇒ Φ⊤ε̸ = 0 . (44) 

Therefore, if Φ⊤ε̸ = 0 , every finite-weight mixed objective places its minimizer away from a⋆. If Φ⊤ε = 0 , including the exact-teacher case 

ε = 0 , then ˆa(β) = a⋆ for all β ∈ (0 , ∞).(Proof in Appendix A.) 

Corollary 4.1 places teacher fitting and mixed data–physics objectives within a single fixed-topology formula. The limit β → 0+ recovers the teacher 30 fit of Lemma 4.1, whereas the mixed minimizer approaches the linear physics-only minimizer as β → ∞ . For every finite β with Φ⊤ε̸ = 0 , the minimizer remains displaced from a⋆. Thus, within this fixed-topology linear setting, every finite-β mixed objective of the form (38) retains a nonzero teacher-dependent coefficient bias whenever Φ⊤ε̸ = 0 .The objective ablation in Section 5.4.3 examines this effect over the tested finite range of β. In those experiments, the observed bias decreases as the physics weight increases but remains nonzero at finite weight. End-to-end search, where the topology itself changes with the objective, lies outside the fixed-topology premise of this corollary. This empirical trend should not be interpreted as a general monotonicity result: the corollary establishes the two endpoint limits and an O(β−1) large-weight asymptotic, but does not imply that the error norm is monotone in β. Nonlinear parameterizations are also outside the corollary, and their local counterpart is discussed in Proposition 4.2. 

4.5. Nonlinear local identifiability and convergence 

The explicit bounds in Sections 4.2 and 4.4 require the linear parameter-ization (L). Symbolic search, however, typically produces nonlinear expres-sion families. In this setting, replacing basis functions by parameter gradients gives only a local linearized sensitivity near a⋆, rather than a global coefficient bound. Standard local results for nonlinear least squares instead clarify the role of initialization; the convergence statements below follow the classical Newton and Gauss–Newton analysis [39]. Conditional on the fixed topol-ogy, coefficient parameterization, and refinement point set, the zero-residual target remains a⋆ and is independent of the teacher. Whether the numeri-cal iteration reaches this target, however, depends on the initialization, and spurious stationary points may occur. 

Proposition 4.2 (Local identifiability and convergence) . Fix the topology, coefficient parameterization, and refinement point set, and suppose that the parameterization is nonlinear in a, so that the linear case (L) does not apply. Suppose also that Assumptions 4.1–4.2 hold, so that F(a⋆) = 0 . Let 

J(a) := Jrefit (a) = ∥F(a)∥22, (45) 

and assume: (R1) Smoothness. The expression s is twice continuously differentiable in a,and F is C2 on an open neighborhood U of a⋆.

31 (R2) Identifiability. The Jacobian DF(a⋆) ∈ RM ×p has full column rank. (R3) Hessian Lipschitz continuity. The Hessian ∇2J is Lipschitz continuous on a neighborhood of a⋆.Then the following statements hold locally. (a) Gradient and Hessian. 

∇J(a) = 2 DF(a)⊤F(a),

∇2J(a) = 2 DF(a)⊤DF(a) + 2 

> M

X

> k=1

Fk(a) ∇2Fk(a). (46) 

(b) Locally unique zero. Since F(a⋆) = 0 ,

∇J(a⋆) = 0 , ∇2J(a⋆) = 2 DF(a⋆)⊤DF(a⋆) ≻ 0, (47) 

where (R2) makes the Gram matrix positive definite. Hence a⋆ is a strict local minimizer of J. Let 

μ0 = σmin 

 DF(a⋆)2 > 0. (48) 

By continuity, there exists a neighborhood of a⋆ on which 

J(a) ≥ μ0

2 ∥a − a⋆∥22. (49) 

Therefore, a⋆ is the only zero-residual point in that neighborhood. (c) Local convergence neighborhood. There exists ρ > 0 such that the ideal full-step Newton iteration initialized at any a0 ∈ B(a⋆, ρ ) converges quadratically to a⋆. Here ∇2J(a⋆) ≻ 0 follows from (R2), and the local Lipschitz continuity of ∇2J follows from (R3). The ideal Gauss– Newton iteration also converges quadratically near a⋆, because F(a⋆) = 0 is a zero-residual solution. (d) Spurious stationary points. The stationarity condition is 

∇J(a) = 0 ⇐⇒ DF(a)⊤F(a) = 0 ⇐⇒ F(a) ∈  col DF(a)⊥. (50) 

Points with F(a) = 0 are true zeros. Points with F(a)̸ = 0 whose resid-ual vector is orthogonal to the tangent space are spurious stationary points, which may be local minima, maxima, or saddle points. At such points, J(a) > 0, so Assumption 4.3 fails. 

32 (Proof in Appendix A.) 

Proposition 4.2 replaces the neighborhood injectivity assumption used in Proposition 4.1 with a Jacobian full-rank condition that guarantees lo-cal identifiability near a⋆. The zero-residual target is still a⋆, but reaching it depends on whether the initialization lies in the local convergence neigh-borhood. Conditional on the fixed topology, coefficient parameterization, and refinement point set, the teacher enters the Stage-B optimization only through the initialization a0 = a0(θ). If a0 ∈ B(a⋆, ρ ), the iteration converges locally to a⋆; outside this neighborhood, no such guarantee is available, and the iteration may, among other possibilities, converge to a spurious stationary point. For comparison, in the linear case with the teacher fit ˆaLS used as initial-ization, Lemma 4.1 gives 

∥a0 − a⋆∥2 ≤ ∥ε∥2

σmin (Φ) . (51) Hence, for any prescribed radius r > 0,

∥ε∥2

σmin (Φ) < r (52) is sufficient to place the linear teacher fit inside B(a⋆, r ). This illustrates how teacher error and conditioning control initialization proximity in the linear setting, but it does not provide a basin guarantee for nonlinear parameteriza-tions. In the nonlinear setting of Proposition 4.2, whether a teacher-derived initialization lies in B(a⋆, ρ ) must be established separately or assessed em-pirically. The initialization study in Section 5.4.4 supports this distinction: the linear parameterizations tested converged from every initialization con-sidered, whereas for the nonlinear topologies examined, some random ini-tializations reached spurious stationary points while teacher-derived starts converged to the solution associated with a⋆.These statements are local. They imply neither global uniqueness of the zero-residual coefficient vector nor global convergence of the numerical solver. They also do not imply that random initializations must fail or that teacher-derived initializations must succeed. The convergence claims in item (c) concern ideal full-step Newton and Gauss–Newton iterations; they do not cover damping, trust-region strategies, or step-length restrictions used in production implementations. The characterization of spurious stationary 33 points is a general consequence of the stationarity equation, not a proof of their existence for any particular problem. A floating-point zero is not an exact zero. Observed low residuals are empirical evidence of near-attainment of the discrete refinement objective and may be consistent with representability, but they establish neither ex-act representability nor exact zero-residual attainment. In the linear case, determinacy can be assessed numerically through the rank, smallest singu-lar value, and conditioning of A; in exact arithmetic, this is equivalent to 

A⊤A ≻ 0. In the nonlinear case, the rank and conditioning of DF(ˆ a) pro-vide only local identifiability evidence. Both linear and nonlinear numerical diagnostics remain subject to finite-precision limitations. 

5. Numerical experiments 

We evaluate DeSyR from complementary end-to-end and mechanism-oriented perspectives. First, we establish a unified comparison protocol and assess recovery accuracy across problems spanning different differential or-ders, spatial dimensions, nonlinearities, and field couplings, including rep-resentative mechanics problems and coupled-system cases. Second, we ex-amine whether repeated symbolic searches provide sufficient candidate-pool coverage and disentangle the contribution of fixed-topology coefficient refine-ment from improvements arising from changes in symbolic structure. Third, objective ablations, initialization-sensitivity tests, and Jacobian rank and conditioning diagnostics are used to evaluate the predictions and local as-sumptions of the fixed-topology analysis developed in Section 4. Finally, we study operator-library misspecification, finite-budget library enrichment, candidate-level convergence, Stage-C selection-gate ablations, and wall-clock cost to characterize failure detection, candidate coverage, refinement relia-bility, selection robustness, and computational efficiency. A supplementary fixed-topology experiment further assesses sensitivity to perturbations in the prescribed constraints. 

5.1. Evaluation protocol and comparison scope 

The study contains 15 differential-equation problems and 18 configura-tions. The Telegraph family contributes two configurations and the Fokker– Planck family contributes three. The suite spans one-dimensional boundary-value problems, space–time equations, multidimensional scalar fields, nonlin-ear equations, and the coupled Kovasznay system. Table 3 summarizes the 34 coverage; complete equations, domains, constraints, reference solutions, and operator libraries are given in Appendix B. 

Table 3: Benchmark coverage used in the numerical evaluation. The 15 differential-equation problems yield 18 configurations because the Telegraph and Fokker–Planck fam-ilies contain multiple manufactured cases. Full equations, domains, constraints, reference solutions, and operator libraries are provided in Appendix B. ID Problem family Domain Governing operator Target structural feature 01–05 Poisson, beam, convection–diffusion 1D second-/fourth-order ODEs frequency, mixed bases, boundary layer 06–09c Diffusion, wave, telegraph, Fokker–Planck 1+1D evolutionary PDEs separability, damping, variable coefficients 10, 13 Klein–Gordon and Burgers 1+1D nonlinear PDEs polynomial coupling, traveling wave 11, 15 Helmholtz and Sine–Poisson 2D elliptic PDEs high-frequency and product structure 12 Sine–Poisson 3D elliptic PDE three-factor product 14 Kovasznay flow 2D coupled nonlinear PDEs three fields and shared factors 

For each configuration, we trained five PINN teachers using distinct ran-dom seeds. For each fixed teacher, ten separately seeded PySR searches were run on the same teacher-generated data, and their retained candidates were merged into a single pool for refinement and selection. Thus, the PySR seeds enlarge the candidate pool and increase search diversity, but they do not constitute additional end-to-end replicates. We therefore treat the PINN seed as the replicate unit and summarize results over n = 5 replicates per configuration. PINNs use fixed Hammersley collocation points, 20000 Adam steps followed by up to 5000 L-BFGS steps, and the physics-validation check-point rule in Section 3.2. Configuration-specific architectures, sample counts, operator libraries, and search budgets are reported in Tables B.2 and B.3. The principal comparisons are controlled comparisons within DeSyR and are designed to separate the contributions of its main stages. The PINN re-sult characterizes the accuracy of the teacher model, the pre-refit version of the ultimately selected topology reflects the accuracy obtained from teacher-guided symbolic search before physics refinement, and the corresponding re-fined expression quantifies the improvement achieved by Stage B without changing that topology. Additional objective ablations compare teacher-only, mixed data–physics, and physics-only coefficient estimation under fixed topology, collocation points, and initialization. These controlled compar-isons are intended to isolate the effects of symbolic recovery and coefficient refinement rather than to provide a direct head-to-head benchmark against independently implemented neural–symbolic pipelines. Interior solution errors and equation residuals are evaluated on verifica-tion points used in neither symbolic search nor coefficient refinement. Con-35 straint residuals, by contrast, are evaluated on the prescribed constraint point sets, which coincide with those used during refinement. They therefore mea-sure the extent to which the imposed boundary or initial constraints are satisfied rather than serving as an independent out-of-sample test. The pri-mary evaluation metrics are relative L2 error, equation residual Req , con-straint residual Rcon , expression complexity, convergence status, and wall-clock time. Pointwise interior values of the reference solution are not used for PINN checkpoint selection, symbolic search, coefficient refinement, or Stage-C selection. When analytic reference solutions are available for manu-factured problems, they are used beforehand only to construct the prescribed forcing and constraint data, and afterward for post hoc solution-error eval-uation. Unless otherwise stated, tables and plot markers report the median over five PINN seeds, with intervals indicating the first and third quartiles. 

5.2. End-to-end recovery across the benchmark suite 

Table 4: End-to-end recovery across all 18 configurations. Results are reported as medians over five independently initialized PINN teachers. The ten symbolic-search seeds per teacher are used only to enlarge the candidate pool and are not counted as independent replicates. Pre-refit denotes the search-stage expression corresponding to the candidate ultimately selected after refinement and Stage-C selection. Complexity is reported as the median; a bracketed interquartile range is shown when it is non-degenerate.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           

> ID Problem PINN rel. L2Pre-refit rel. L2Refined rel. L2Req Rcon Complexity 01 Param. Poisson 1.09 ×10 −59.82 ×10 −60†0†0†402 Multifreq. Poisson 4.29 ×10 −33.90 ×10 −37.84 ×10 −17 6.50 ×10 −17 7.85 ×10 −17 12 03 Euler–Bernoulli 6.42 ×10 −61.69 ×10 −31.03 ×10 −14 4.07 ×10 −20 4.99 ×10 −17 14 04 Conv.–diff. 4.34 ×10 −54.71 ×10 −44.09 ×10 −16 0†1.57 ×10 −16 805 Sine–Poisson 1D 5.42 ×10 −61.87 ×10 −51.98 ×10 −15 1.41 ×10 −14 2.28 ×10 −15 406 Diffusion 8.92 ×10 −51.29 ×10 −51.94 ×10 −15 8.26 ×10 −15 1.74 ×10 −15 907a Wave 2.44 ×10 −40†0†0†0†507b Telegraph-1 3.75 ×10 −41.90 ×10 −40†0†0†808 Telegraph-2 5.54 ×10 −51.50 ×10 −50†0†0†909a Fokker–Planck-1 2.11 ×10 −40†0†0†0†309b Fokker–Planck-2 5.57 ×10 −40†0†0†0†409c Fokker–Planck-3 1.35 ×10 −42.17 ×10 −50†0†0†610 Klein–Gordon 9.27 ×10 −36.95 ×10 −41.85 ×10 −14 1.95 ×10 −12 6.86 ×10 −15 14 11 Helmholtz 4.94 ×10 −26.52 ×10 −32.31 ×10 −14 3.70 ×10 −12 1.98 ×10 −14 912 Sine–Poisson 3D 1.96 ×10 −44.07 ×10 −53.52 ×10 −15 4.14 ×10 −14 1.16 ×10 −15 13 13 Burgers 6.47 ×10 −43.92 ×10 −43.71 ×10 −17 4.50 ×10 −17 7.24 ×10 −18 12 14 Kovasznay 2.72 ×10 −32.65 ×10 −33.13 ×10 −15 1.01 ×10 −14 4.49 ×10 −15 30 [30–35] 15 Sine–Poisson 2D 4.39 ×10 −53.10 ×10 −52.84 ×10 −15 2.61 ×10 −14 1.34 ×10 −15 9

† Stored as an exact floating-point zero; no display floor was applied. 

All 90 selected expressions were recorded as converged; every selected refinement involving free coefficients converged successfully. Seven configu-36 rations achieved a stored-zero median refined error. Among the remaining configurations, Helmholtz had the largest median refined error, 2.31 × 10 −14 ,while also exhibiting the largest median teacher error, 4.94 × 10 −2. The Helmholtz case therefore illustrates that a comparatively inaccurate PINN teacher can still guide the discovery of a symbolic candidate whose coeffi-cients are subsequently recovered to near-machine precision by physics-only refinement. For the coupled Kovasznay problem, the median relative error decreases from 2.72 × 10 −3 for the PINN teacher to 3.13 × 10 −15 after joint refinement of the symbolic fields. Across the full benchmark suite, the re-fined equation residuals in Table 4 are likewise extremely small, providing a complementary measure of physical consistency alongside the solution er-rors. The associated seed-level dispersion is reported in Appendix Table C.1. Figures 2 and 3 further summarize the across-seed distributions of these com-plementary indicators. 37 10 −17 10 −15 10 −13 10 −11 10 −9 10 −7 10 −5 10 −3 10 −1 

Relative L2 error   

> Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Wave Telegraph-1 Telegraph-2 Klein--Gordon Fokker--Planck-1 Fokker--Planck-2 Fokker--Planck-3 Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers Kovasznay Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D
> stored 0
> PINN Pre-refit Refined

Figure 2: Solution-error distributions across all 18 configurations. Markers denote the median relative L2 error over five independently initialized PINN teachers, and horizontal intervals indicate the interquartile range. Results are shown for the PINN teacher, the selected pre-refit expression, and the refined DeSyR expression. Open markers within the shaded floor region indicate stored floating-point zero medians. 

38 10 −17 10 −15 10 −13 10 −11 10 −9 10 −7 10 −5 10 −3 10 −1  

> Verification residual
> Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Wave Telegraph-1 Telegraph-2 Klein--Gordon Fokker--Planck-1 Fokker--Planck-2 Fokker--Planck-3 Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers Kovasznay Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D
> stored 0
> Req Rcon

Figure 3: Verification residuals of the refined expressions across all 18 configurations. Equation residuals Req are evaluated on independent interior verification points, whereas constraint residuals Rcon are evaluated on the prescribed constraint point sets. Markers denote medians over five independently initialized PINN teachers, and horizontal intervals indicate interquartile ranges. Open markers within the shaded floor region indicate stored floating-point zero medians. 

The benchmark suite is intentionally heterogeneous and is designed to probe a broad range of structural challenges rather than to represent a random sample of physical models. The one-dimensional cases exam-ine frequency variation, mixed-basis structure, high-order derivatives, and boundary-layer behavior. The space–time cases cover separable, additive, multiplicative, and shared-parameter structures. The multidimensional cases further increase spatial dimension and frequency, while the Klein–Gordon, Burgers, and Kovasznay problems introduce nonlinearities and field cou-pling. Complete reconstructions are provided in Appendix Fig. D.1 for the one-dimensional cases, Appendix Figs. D.2 and D.3 for the space–time cases, 39 and Appendix Figs. D.4 and D.5 for the multidimensional Sine–Poisson cases. Seed-level distributions of recovery error and expression complexity are reported in Appendix Figs. D.6 and D.7. 

5.3. Representative mechanics cases 

Three representative cases are examined in greater detail to reveal aspects of the recovery process that are not fully captured by aggregate error metrics: a nonlinear travelling wave, a high-frequency elliptic mode, and a coupled velocity–pressure system. The first case is the viscous Burgers equation, a prototypical nonlin-ear convection–diffusion problem that admits travelling-wave solutions and therefore provides a compact test of nonlinear structural recovery. We con-sider 

ut + uu x − 0.05 uxx = 0 , (53) with exact solution 

u⋆(x, t ) = 0 .5 − 0.5 tanh(5 x − 2.5t). (54) As shown in Figure 4, the PINN exhibits a spatially and temporally struc-tured error pattern around the travelling transition layer. The ultimately selected symbolic candidate captures the travelling-wave structure, which re-mains fixed during coefficient refinement. Refinement reduces the median relative L2 error from 3.92 × 10 −4 before refinement to 3.71 × 10 −17 after-ward, suppressing the structured field error to near numerical precision. This case therefore shows that the improvement is not confined to the aggregate error norm, but is also evident directly in the recovered space–time field. The second case is the two-dimensional Helmholtz equation, a canonical elliptic problem whose oscillatory solution provides a stringent test of high-frequency structural recovery. On [−1, 1] 2, we consider 

uxx + uyy + u = (1 − 32 π2) sin(4 πx ) sin(4 πy ),u|∂Ω = 0 , (55) with exact solution 

u⋆(x, y ) = sin(4 πx ) sin(4 πy ). (56) As shown in Figure 4, the PINN exhibits spatially structured approximation errors in resolving the high-frequency oscillations. The ultimately selected 40 symbolic candidate captures the underlying product structure, and subse-quent fixed-topology coefficient refinement reduces the remaining error to near numerical precision, yielding a median relative L2 error of 2.31 × 10 −14 

over five PINN seeds. This case illustrates that physics-only coefficient re-finement can substantially improve upon the teacher field once a suitable high-frequency symbolic structure has been identified. −0.5 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8              

> Burgers
> t
> aReference
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> bPINN absolute error
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> cDeSyR absolute error
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> x
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> Helmholtz
> y
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> x
> −0.5 0.0 0.5
> x
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4

Figure 4: Field-level recovery for two representative scalar cases. Rows correspond to Burgers and Helmholtz, while columns show the reference field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR ex-pression. Burgers provides a nonlinear travelling-wave test, whereas Helmholtz probes high-frequency structural recovery and exhibits the largest teacher error in the benchmark suite. 

The third case is the Kovasznay flow, a classical steady solution of the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations and a representative test of coupled multi-field recovery. Unlike the preceding scalar problems, this case requires the simultaneous reconstruction of two velocity components and the pressure field under nonlinear momentum coupling and the incompressibility condi-tion. We consider the Kovasznay benchmark described in [28, 23], for which the governing equations are 

u · ∇ u + ∇p − ν∇2u = 0 ,

∇ · u = 0 , (57) 41 with Reynolds number Re = 20 and ν = 1 /Re = 0 .05 . The corresponding analytic velocity and pressure fields are listed in Appendix Table B.1. The jointly recovered symbolic fields capture the exponential and trigono-metric structure of the coupled velocity–pressure solution, including the com-mon base exponential rate and its cross-field relationships. After joint co-efficient refinement, the median relative L2 errors are 1.81 × 10 −15 for u,

3.40 × 10 −15 for v, and 3.69 × 10 −15 for p. The total final expression com-plexity ranges from 30 to 35 across seeds, reflecting algebraically equivalent phase representations that can remain distinct after symbolic simplification. As shown in Figure 5, the PINN exhibits structured pointwise errors across all three fields, whereas the refined symbolic solution reduces these errors to near numerical precision. This case illustrates that joint symbolic recovery can achieve near-machine-precision accuracy in a nonlinear coupled velocity– pressure system while enforcing the incompressibility condition, extending the empirical evidence beyond the independently recovered scalar cases. 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0             

> uy
> aReference
> 0.0 0.5
> bPINN absolute error
> 0.0 0.5
> cDeSyR absolute error
> 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> vy
> 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.5
> x
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> py
> 0.0 0.5
> x
> 0.0 0.5
> x
> −4 −2 02410 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −0.8 −0.4 0.0 0.4 0.8 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4

Figure 5: Field-level recovery for the coupled Kovasznay flow. Rows correspond to the streamwise velocity u, transverse velocity v, and pressure p, while columns show the ref-erence field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR expression. 

42 5.4. Mechanism and theory-aligned tests 5.4.1. Candidate-pool coverage under repeated searches 

Condition C2 requires the retained Stage-A candidate pool to contain at least one target-capable symbolic topology. Because algebraic topology cov-erage is not directly observable from the archived outputs alone, we assess its end-to-end consequence by examining how the number of separately seeded symbolic searches retained per PINN teacher affects recovery. The archived replay covers 12 scalar benchmark configurations, each with five indepen-dently trained PINN teachers, giving 60 teacher-level instances. Consistent with Stage A, each archived search run contributes up to five representative Pareto candidates selected by the Stage-A retention rule. For each instance, the first K ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 5, 10 } archived search runs are pooled before the stan-dard Stage B refinement and Stage C selection. A recovery is counted when the selected refined expression has relative L2 error no larger than 10 −10 .Figure 6 shows that the pool formed from one search run recovers 58 of the 60 instances. Including candidates from a second search run recovers all 60 instances, with no further change for K = 3 , 5, or 10 . The two changes occur for Helmholtz teachers 0 and 4: their selected relative errors decrease from 8.54 ×10 −1 and 6.98 ×10 −1, respectively, to 2.31 ×10 −14 when the second search is included. For the remaining 11 configurations, all five teacher-level instances are already recovered with K = 1 ; the configuration-level counts are reported in Appendix Table C.2. Within this archived protocol and its fixed per-search retention rule, these results indicate that pooling candidates from a second independently seeded symbolic search can mitigate occasional limitations in the retained candidate set. The replay does not distinguish between a target-capable topology that was not generated by a search and one that was generated but excluded by the five-candidate truncation. It therefore provides an end-to-end indicator relevant to candidate coverage rather than a direct measurement of algebraic topology coverage. Nor does it compare or validate alternative within-front retention rules, or imply that the same saturation point applies under other search budgets, seed orderings, or problem distributions. 43 1 2 3 5 10            

> Search runs retained, K
> 010 20 30 40 50 60
> Recovered instances
> a
> 58/60 60/60 60/60 60/60 60/60
> Recovery versus retained search runs ( n= 60 )
> K= 1 K= 2
> Search runs retained, K
> 10 −13
> 10 −11
> 10 −9
> 10 −7
> 10 −5
> 10 −3
> 10 −1
> Selected relative  L2 error
> bEffect of a second search on Helmholtz
> Helmholtz, seed 0 Helmholtz, seed 4

Figure 6: Effect of the number of archived symbolic-search runs retained in each candidate pool. Panel (a) reports end-to-end recovery across 12 scalar benchmark configurations and five independently trained PINN teachers per configuration under the fixed Stage-A rule that each run contributes up to five representative Pareto candidates. Panel (b) shows the selected relative L2 errors for the two Helmholtz instances whose recovered expressions change when a second search run is included. Recovery denotes a selected refined expression with relative L2 error not exceeding 10 −10 .

5.4.2. Fixed-topology coefficient correction 

Sine–Poisson 1D provides a direct stage-wise test of fixed-topology coef-ficient refinement. On x ∈ [0 , 1] , we consider the boundary-value problem from PR-GPSR [32] 

uxx + π2 sin( πx ) = 0 ,u(0) = u(1) = 0 , (58) with exact solution 

u⋆(x) = sin( πx ). (59) Across all five PINN seeds, the ultimately selected candidates have the same search-stage topology, sin( αx ), so Stage B updates only the frequency param-eter α while holding that topology fixed during optimization. The median relative L2 errors of the PINN teacher, the pre-refit version of the ultimately selected candidate, and the refined expression are 5.42 × 10 −6, 1.87 × 10 −5,and 1.98 × 10 −15 , respectively. The modest increase from the PINN error to the pre-refit error reflects the symbolic compression step: although the ulti-mately selected search-stage candidate already has the target-capable form 

sin( αx ), its provisional frequency parameter remains slightly offset from the 44 exact value π. Stage B corrects this residual parameter mismatch without reopening the topology search, reducing the median error by approximately ten orders of magnitude. As shown in Fig. 7, the reference, PINN, pre-refit, and refined solution profiles are visually almost indistinguishable, whereas the pointwise-error panel clearly exposes the improvement introduced by coefficient refinement. Across all five seeds, Stage B moves the pre-refit frequency estimate toward 

π and reduces the resulting solution error to near machine precision while keeping the search-stage topology fixed throughout coefficient optimization. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0           

> u(x)
> aReference PINN Pre-refit Refined
> α: 3.1415536 → 3.14159265358979
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> x
> 10 −16
> 10 −14
> 10 −12
> 10 −10
> 10 −8
> 10 −6
> 10 −4
> Absolute error
> b

Figure 7: Stage-wise recovery for the Sine–Poisson 1D problem using a representative PINN seed. Panel (a) compares the reference solution, PINN teacher, pre-refit version of the ultimately selected candidate, and refined expression; staggered markers are used to distinguish the nearly coincident profiles. Panel (b) shows the corresponding pointwise absolute errors, highlighting the substantial error reduction achieved by fixed-topology coefficient refinement. 

45 Table 5: Representative coefficient corrections under fixed symbolic topologies. For each problem, the reported PINN seed is the one whose teacher error is closest to the median over five seeds. During Stage-B optimization, only the continuous coefficients are updated while the search-stage topology is held fixed; subsequent algebraic simplification may remove terms whose refined coefficients become exactly zero. ID Problem Fixed topology Coefficient Pre-refit Refined Relative L2 error (pre-refit → refined) 05 Sine–Poisson 1D sin( αx ) α 3.1415536 3.14159265358979 2.48 × 10 −5 → 1.98 × 10 −15                                                                                

> 02 Multifreq. Poisson a0+a1x+ sin( a2x) + cos( a3x)a00.004771 03.90 ×10 −3→7.84 ×10 −17 a1−0.100054 −0.1
> a20.700030 0.7
> a31.500109 1.5
> 03 Euler–Bernoulli a4x4+a3x3+a2x2+a1xa41.16 ×10 −62.08 ×10 −6
> 1.51 ×10 −2→3.01 ×10 −14 a3−2.30 ×10 −5−4.17 ×10 −5
> a2−1.16 ×10 −40
> a12.30 ×10 −32.08 ×10 −3
> 13 Burgers a0+a1tanh( a2t+a3x)a00.499879 0.53.92 ×10 −4→3.71 ×10 −17 a10.500090 0.5
> a22.492718 2.5
> a3−4.987499 −5

Table 5 summarizes representative coefficient corrections under fixed sym-bolic topologies. For Sine–Poisson 1D, refinement adjusts the frequency pa-rameter α from 3.1415536 to 3.14159265358979 , reducing the relative L2 error from 2.48 × 10 −5 to 1.98 × 10 −15 . In the Multifrequency Poisson case, the constant term, linear coefficient, and two frequency parameters are further calibrated while the mixed trigonometric structure is preserved, reducing the error from 3.90 × 10 −3 to 7.84 × 10 −17 . For Euler–Bernoulli, refinement recal-ibrates the polynomial coefficients, including driving the spurious quadratic coefficient to zero, and reduces the error from 1.51 × 10 −2 to 3.01 × 10 −14 .In the Burgers case, the four free coefficients of the nonlinear travelling-wave expression are adjusted toward their exact values, reducing the error from 

3.92 × 10 −4 to 3.71 × 10 −17 . These results show that substantial gains in recovery accuracy can be achieved through continuous coefficient refinement on a frozen search-stage topology, without requiring an additional topology search. 

5.4.3. Ablation of coefficient-refinement objectives Linear fixed-topology parameterizations.. We first consider fixed expression spaces that are linear in their coefficient vectors. The six settings com-prise Multifrequency Poisson, Euler–Bernoulli, Convection–diffusion, Diffu-sion, Helmholtz, and Sine–Poisson 1D. In each setting, the exact solution is representable in the prescribed linear basis, while five PINN teachers provide 46 the field values used by the teacher term. The governing equation and the corresponding boundary or initial conditions form the physics term. Conse-quently, the coefficient estimation problem has the linear fixed-topology form analyzed in Corollary 4.1; only the physics weight β is varied. Figure 8 shows the resulting relative errors for the five teachers of each problem. As β increases, the mixed estimates progressively approach the physics-only solution. Away from the floating-point accuracy floor, the es-timated tail slopes are close to −1 for all six bases; the numerical slope estimates and fixed bases are listed in Table C.4. The polynomial Euler– Bernoulli basis shows a delayed onset of this asymptotic regime, whereas the other five cases exhibit approximately inverse-weight behavior from smaller values of β. These observations are consistent with the O(β−1) finite-weight coefficient bias characterized in Corollary 4.1. 10 14                                   

> 10 12
> 10 10
> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> Relative  L2 error
> Multifrequency Poisson 10 14
> 10 12
> 10 10
> 10 8
> 10 6
> Euler--Bernoulli 10 14
> 10 12
> 10 10
> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> Convection--diffusion
> T1
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6
> 10 8
> 10 10
> P
> 10 16
> 10 13
> 10 10
> 10 7
> 10 4
> Relative  L2 error
> Diffusion
> T1
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6
> 10 8
> 10 10
> P
> 10 16
> 10 13
> 10 10
> 10 7
> 10 4
> Helmholtz
> T1
> 10 2
> 10 4
> 10 6
> 10 8
> 10 10
> P
> 10 17
> 10 15
> 10 13
> 10 11
> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> Sine--Poisson 1D Objective: teacher-only (T), mixed weight , physics-only (P)

Figure 8: Relative errors under teacher-only fitting (T), mixed data–physics objectives with increasing physics weight β, and physics-only refinement (P) for six fixed bases linear in their coefficient vectors. Light traces show the five PINN teachers in each problem and dark traces show their medians. The mixed solutions approach the physics-only endpoint as β increases. Points at the numerical accuracy floor are excluded from the slope estimates reported in Table C.4. 

47 Recovered fixed topologies.. We next examine the objective choice on the fixed expressions selected by the full recovery procedure. This ablation holds the symbolic topology, collocation points, and initialization fixed across ten scalar benchmark configurations and five PINN seeds per configuration, giv-ing 50 problem–seed combinations, while varying only the information used to estimate the coefficients. Under teacher-only fitting, the median relative 

L2 error is 8.85 × 10 −5. Increasing the physics weight from β = 1 to β = 10 6

lowers the median to 1.45 × 10 −13 , and the physics-only endpoint reaches 

1.86 × 10 −17 . The corresponding equation residuals likewise decrease from teacher-only fitting through the mixed objectives to physics-only refinement; complete quartiles are reported in Table C.5. Figure 9 provides the distributional view of these results. Because the selected expressions include nonlinear parameterizations, this comparison ex-tends beyond the linear assumptions of Corollary 4.1. It exhibits the same practical progression from teacher-only fitting through increasingly physics-weighted mixed objectives to physics-only refinement, but no asymptotic rate is assigned to the nonlinear cases. Teacher only         

> 10 010 210 410 6Physics only 10 −15
> 10 −13
> 10 −11
> 10 −9
> 10 −7
> 10 −5
> 10 −3
> Relative  L2 error
> a
> Teacher only
> 10 010 210 410 6Physics only 10 −14
> 10 −11
> 10 −8
> 10 −5
> 10 −2
> Equation residual
> b

Mixed objective: physics weight β

Figure 9: Ablation of coefficient-refinement objectives under fixed symbolic topology, col-location points, and initialization across ten scalar benchmark configurations and five PINN seeds per configuration. Panels (a) and (b) report the median relative L2 error and equation residual Req , respectively, with interquartile ranges. Results are shown for teacher-only fitting, mixed data–physics objectives with finite physics weight β, and physics-only refinement. 

48 5.4.4. Initialization sensitivity and local identifiability 

We first examine whether teacher-derived coefficients provide effective initializations for Stage B. The study covers 12 scalar configurations. Ten configurations contain free coefficients, yielding 50 teacher-derived initializa-tions and 250 independently generated random initializations drawn from 

U (−1, 1) ; Wave and Fokker–Planck-1 provide ten zero-parameter identity controls. Figure 10(a) compares the refined errors for the ten free-parameter configurations. For Euler–Bernoulli, Telegraph-1, and Burgers, uninformed random initialization can produce competitive solutions and occasionally yields lower median errors than the teacher-derived start. This behavior does not simply track the local Jacobian conditioning reported in panel (b): Euler– Bernoulli, for example, has the largest condition number among the audited expressions. The distinction is expected because Jacobian conditioning is a local property at the refined solution, whereas initialization sensitivity con-cerns whether an optimizer reaches a low-error solution from an uninformed starting point. Across the broader set of configurations, teacher-derived ini-tialization is nevertheless more reliable: it consistently reaches low-error so-lutions and avoids the high-error outcomes observed from random starts in several problems. Its main benefit is therefore not uniformly lower error in every case, but greater robustness across the heterogeneous configurations examined here. Detailed initialization results for the free-parameter con-figurations are reported in Table C.6; the zero-parameter identity controls require no initialization and are excluded from this comparison. We next assess local identifiability using a broader audit of 13 scalar fixed-topology expressions with free coefficients. For each audited expression, we form the Jacobian of the collocation-residual map with respect to the coef-ficient vector at the refined solution. All audited Jacobians are numerically full column rank in the finite-precision rank audit summarized in Table C.7, providing local numerical evidence that the free parameter directions are distinguishable under the chosen residual equations. Figure 10(b) reports the corresponding Jacobian condition numbers, which characterize the local conditioning of the adopted coefficient parameterization and residual scaling at the refined solutions. The values span several orders of magnitude, with Euler–Bernoulli exhibiting the largest condition number. Together, the rank and conditioning diagnostics provide numerical sup-port for the full-column-rank Jacobian condition underlying the local iden-tifiability analysis in Section 4.5. Because these quantities are evaluated 49 at the numerically refined solutions rather than throughout the parameter space, they do not establish global uniqueness or guarantee convergence from arbitrary initializations. Zero-parameter cases require no rank test and are reported separately, while the coupled Kovasznay case is excluded from this scalar audit. Detailed rank results are provided in Table C.7. 50 10 −16 10 −13 10 −10 10 −7 10 −4 10 −1 

Post-refit relative L2 error 

> Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Telegraph-1 Klein--Gordon Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers

a     

> Teacher-fit start Random starts 10 010 110 210 310 410 5

Jacobian condition number 

> Diffusion Helmholtz Klein--Gordon Param. Poisson Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D Sine--Poisson 3D Telegraph-2 Telegraph-1 Multifreq. Poisson Burgers Conv.--diffusion Euler--Bernoulli

bFigure 10: Reliability diagnostics for fixed-topology coefficient refinement. Panel (a) com-pares the post-refinement relative L2 errors obtained from teacher-derived and random co-efficient initializations for ten free-parameter configurations. Teacher-derived summaries contain five starts, one per PINN teacher, whereas random-start summaries contain 25 runs, with five random starts paired with each teacher; markers denote medians and hor-izontal intervals indicate interquartile ranges. Panel (b) reports the Jacobian condition numbers for 13 audited scalar fixed-topology expressions with free coefficients, characteriz-ing local parameter conditioning at the refined solutions. Stored floating-point zero errors in panel (a) are displayed at the plotting floor of 10 −18 on the logarithmic axis. 

51 5.4.5. Scope and Representational Limitations of the Operator Library 

We consider the Parametric Poisson problem on x ∈ [0 , 1] ,

uxx (x) + 16 sin(4 x) = 0 ,u(0) = 0 ,u(1) = sin(4) ,

(60) whose exact solution is 

u⋆(x) = sin(4 x). (61) Restricting the symbolic search to a polynomial library excludes the sine operator and therefore places the exact solution outside the admissible ex-pression space. Under this misspecified library, fixed-topology coefficient refinement yields the sixth-degree polynomial 

˜u(x) = x  − 4.299578 x5 + 10 .069427 x4 + 0 .470956 x3

− 11 .053548 x2 + 0 .056077 x + 3 .999863 . (62) The refined expression has complexity 27. Refinement converges and reduces the constraint residual to Rcon = 6 .99 × 10 −15 , showing that the prescribed boundary conditions are satisfied to high numerical accuracy. However, the independently evaluated equation residual remains Req = 6 .31 × 10 −2, while the relative L2 error remains 5.36 × 10 −4. Verification on the independent interior points therefore exposes the residual discrepancy associated with the misspecified representation space, as shown in Fig. 11. This result delineates the operating boundary of the framework. DeSyR can correct coefficient errors on a fixed topology when the target is repre-sentable in the corresponding Stage-B parameterization, but coefficient re-finement cannot remove representation error caused by operators that are absent from the prescribed search library. In such cases, verification on inde-pendent interior points flags the remaining model-form error, distinguishing a close approximation from a successful exact recovery. 52 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0             

> x
> −0.75 −0.50 −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> u(x)
> rel. L2= 5.36 e− 04
> Req = 6.31 e− 02
> aReference Polynomial library 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> x
> 10 −8
> 10 −7
> 10 −6
> 10 −5
> 10 −4
> 10 −3
> Absolute error  |e(x)|
> b

Figure 11: Recovery under a misspecified polynomial operator library. Panel (a) compares the sine reference with the refined polynomial candidate, and panel (b) shows its pointwise absolute error. The non-negligible independently evaluated equation residual exposes the representation error that coefficient refinement cannot eliminate. 

The preceding experiment considers an insufficient operator library. We next examine the complementary finite-budget effect of enriching the library with additional operators that may distract the symbolic search, as summa-rized in Table 6. In this frozen-teacher study, the PINN teachers, binary operators, numerical settings, Stage-B refinement, and Stage-C selection are held fixed. For Sine–Poisson 1D, all five teachers recover the same expres-sion under both the baseline and enriched libraries. For Burgers, enrichment changes the recovery count from 4/5 to 3/5 and increases the median time from 275.5 to 377.8 s. In the high-frequency Helmholtz case, however, the enriched library recovers only two of five teacher instances using two indepen-dently seeded searches, compared with five of five under the baseline {sin }

library. An audit of the raw Pareto fronts for the prescribed separated-sine family shows that, in all three failed enriched-library instances, no recognized target-family candidate appears in either raw Pareto front or in the retained Stage-B pool. Increasing the search budget to K = 5 restores recovery to five of five instances, but increases the median search-and-refinement time from 344.0 to 754.2 s. Within this tested setting, these results indicate that operator-library design and finite search budget jointly determine candidate coverage. They do not imply library-agnostic symbolic discovery, nor do they establish a generally sufficient value of K.53 Table 6: Exploratory frozen-teacher study of sensitivity to unary-operator library enrich-ment. Baseline and enriched settings use identical PINN teachers, numerical configura-tions, Stage-B refinement, and Stage-C selection. Recovery denotes the number of teachers for which the selected refined expression attains a relative L2 error no greater than 10 −10 .Candidate refits are reported as converged/total, and the reported time includes both symbolic search and coefficient refinement. Results are aggregated over five teachers and are reported separately from the frozen formal benchmark protocol.                                                     

> Problem Unary library KRecovery Converged/total refits Median time (s) Sine–Poisson 1D {sin }25/522 /22 46.0 Sine–Poisson 1D {sin ,cos ,exp ,tanh }25/536 /36 50.9 Burgers {tanh }24/547 /50 275.5 Burgers {tanh ,sin ,cos ,exp }23/547 /50 377.8 Helmholtz {sin }25/546 /46 295.6 Helmholtz {sin ,cos ,exp ,tanh }22/545 /50 344.0 Helmholtz {sin ,cos ,exp ,tanh }55/5111 /125 754.2

5.5. Selection robustness and computational cost 5.5.1. Stage-C selection-gate ablation 

We assess the contribution of the Stage-C selection rules by replaying 60 frozen scalar candidate pools with one rule removed at a time. Removing the convergence-eligibility gate changes only one final selection, but the replace-ment is an unconverged candidate with complexity 47, and the worst relative 

L2 error increases from 1.16 × 10 −13 to 4.29 × 10 −3. In contrast, removing the complexity preference changes 12 selected expressions without increasing the worst error, consistent with its role in favoring simpler expressions among candidates that remain comparable under the preceding gates. The teacher-compatibility and physics-equivalence gates are inactive on these archived candidate pools, so this replay does not provide evidence about their behav-ior in cases where those gates become active. Thus, within these archived pools, the replay identifies the convergence-eligibility gate as an important safeguard against a severe worst-case failure, while the complexity preference primarily promotes parsimonious selection. The complete replay is shown in Appendix Fig. D.9. The convergence status of the final selected expression alone does not fully characterize the numerical behavior of all candidates entering Stage B. Across 17 archived scalar configurations, 3,745 of 3,774 candidate refits involving at least one free coefficient (99.23%) are recorded as converged. The remain-ing 29 cases comprise 27 timeouts (0.72%) and two finite but unconverged refits (0.05%); no non-finite outcomes are observed. These candidate-level 54 statistics provide complementary empirical support for the operational con-vergence check in Condition C3, while not constituting a global convergence guarantee. 

5.5.2. Wall-clock cost 

The dominant computational cost is problem dependent. PINN train-ing dominates the fourth-order Euler–Bernoulli configuration, whereas the symbolic-recovery stage dominates Wave and Burgers. Median total runtimes range from approximately 100 seconds for Parametric Poisson to roughly 18–25 minutes across the most computationally demanding configurations. These wall-clock timings are implementation- and hardware-dependent em-pirical cost indicators rather than asymptotic complexity estimates. Com-plete configuration-level timing distributions and representative stage-wise breakdowns are provided in Appendix Fig. D.8 and Table D.1. 

6. Discussion 

6.1. Methodological implications and diagnostics 

DeSyR assigns teacher data and governing physics to distinct optimiza-tion tasks. The PINN supplies a global field approximation that provides a practical surrogate for guiding combinatorial topology search. Once a topol-ogy is frozen, the governing equation and prescribed constraints are used to determine the final coefficients. This separation does not amount to re-placing teacher-guided symbolic regression with a fully physics-driven search: Stage A remains teacher guided, and Stage C still uses teacher compatibility to exclude refined candidates that are no longer compatible with the teacher-guided solution branch. The key distinction is that teacher data are absent from the Stage-B objective that determines the reported coefficients. This division differs at the objective level from teacher-only distillation, which estimates topology and constants from network samples, and from mixed data–physics formulations, which retain both information sources in a common coefficient objective. The fixed-topology analysis explains why this difference matters. Teacher fitting inherits the projected teacher error, whereas, for linear fixed-topology parameterizations, a finite-weight mixed objective retains an O(β−1) teacher-dependent contribution when Φ⊤ε̸ = 0 .Physics-only refinement conditionally removes this specific source of bias un-der well-posedness, fixed-topology representability, attainment of zero resid-55 ual, and discrete determinacy. These results isolate the coefficient-estimation mechanism while holding the selected topology fixed. Successful recovery depends on the three operational conditions C1–C3 in Section 3.1. C1 requires teacher-based ranking and compatibility to provide sufficiently informative guidance for candidate screening; C2 requires the retained candidate pool to contain at least one target-capable topology; and C3 requires at least one target-capable candidate entering Stage B to yield a finite, converged refinement. Together, these conditions separate the roles of teacher guidance, candidate coverage, and coefficient optimization, while also emphasizing the dependence of recovery on the prescribed expression library. The verification and audit components make several of these mechanisms empirically assessable. Under the polynomial-only library in Fig. 11, the re-fined expression satisfies the prescribed constraints to high numerical accu-racy but retains an independently evaluated equation residual of 6.31 × 10 −2,showing that equation verification can flag a representation-space mismatch that coefficient refinement does not eliminate. The initialization audit sup-ports the use of teacher-derived starting values, the Jacobian audit provides local numerical rank and conditioning evidence for the selected scalar expres-sions, and the frozen-pool gate replay shows that the convergence-eligibility rule can prevent a severe selection failure in the archived candidate pools. The candidate-level audit separates the numerical convergence behavior of all Stage-B refits from the convergence status of the final selected expres-sion. The operator-library enrichment study further shows that enlarging the search space can require a larger search budget to preserve a target-capable topology in the candidate pool. Together, these complementary diagnos-tics provide empirical support for Conditions C2 and C3 under the tested finite-budget settings, while neither establishing library-independent candi-date coverage nor implying global convergence. The theoretical results describe recovery under a fixed symbolic structure. For finite collocation sets, exact fixed-topology recovery requires sufficient discrete determinacy. For nonlinear parameterizations, the corresponding identifiability and convergence guarantees are local and are characterized through the Jacobian conditions in Section 4.5. These requirements do not establish topology-discovery guarantees or global nonlinear convergence, but they identify concrete quantities that can be examined when extending the framework to new expression families and governing operators. 56 6.2. Scope and future directions 

The present study focuses on controlled benchmark problems with pre-scribed operator libraries, regular domains, and analytic reference solutions. Extending DeSyR to noisy or uncertain observations, irregular geometries, discontinuous or multiscale solutions, and richer symbolic spaces will re-quire renewed assessment of candidate-pool coverage, coefficient-refinement robustness, and verification reliability under these more challenging condi-tions. Such extensions may also require search and refinement strategies that better accommodate larger expression spaces and less regular solution structures. A further direction is to move beyond fixed problem-specific operator libraries toward adaptive operator screening or hierarchical library expan-sion guided jointly by teacher information and physics-based criteria. Such strategies could improve representational coverage while controlling the com-binatorial growth of the symbolic search space. A supplementary fixed-topology study examines sensitivity to perturba-tions in the prescribed constraints while keeping the governing equation un-changed. All 48 refits converge, although the error relative to the unper-turbed reference increases with the perturbation level. These results provide limited empirical evidence on the sensitivity of Stage B to constraint pertur-bations, but they neither address noise in teacher-guided topology discovery nor establish a general stability guarantee. Beyond recovery accuracy itself, the resulting closed-form expressions open several directions for downstream use. Future work may examine their utility for sensitivity analysis, reduced-order modeling, parameter studies, and repeated evaluation within design-optimization workflows, where explicit symbolic representations may offer advantages in interpretability and com-putational efficiency. 

7. Conclusions 

DeSyR separates symbolic topology discovery from final coefficient determination. A PINN guides the stochastic structure search and pro-vides provisional coefficients, while the governing equation and prescribed constraints define a teacher-free refinement objective once the symbolic topology is fixed. For linear fixed-topology parameterizations, the analysis characterizes teacher-error inheritance and the finite-weight bias induced by mixed data–physics objectives. Under well-posedness, representability, 57 zero-residual attainment, and discrete determinacy, physics-only refinement conditionally recovers the exact coefficients. For nonlinear parameteriza-tions, the corresponding identifiability and convergence guarantees are local and make the role of initialization explicit. Across 15 differential-equation problems and 18 tested configurations, physics-only refinement reaches near-machine-precision accuracy in many cases. In the reported same-topology comparisons for which both pre-refinement and post-refinement errors are strictly positive, the relative L2

error is reduced by eight to fourteen orders of magnitude. The nonlinear and coupled cases further demonstrate that the decoupled procedure can operate effectively beyond linear scalar problems. At the same time, the operator-library misspecification experiment shows that coefficient refinement cannot remove representation error when the target solution lies outside the pre-scribed symbolic space. The complementary enrichment study further shows that, under a finite search budget, enlarging the operator library can reduce candidate coverage and may therefore require additional search effort to retain a target-capable topology. Within the tested representable settings, these results support the cen-tral premise that an approximate neural teacher can guide symbolic structure discovery without necessarily imposing its error scale on the final recovered coefficients, provided that a target-capable topology is retained and the sub-sequent physics-only refinement converges. 58 Appendix A. Proofs of theoretical results 

Proof of Lemma 4.1. By (L-rank), v⊤Φ⊤Φv = ∥Φv∥22 > 0 for v̸ = 0 , so Φ⊤Φ

is positive definite and invertible. Setting the gradient of the strictly convex quadratic to zero gives the normal equations Φ⊤Φ ˆ aLS = Φ ⊤yθ. Assump-tion 4.2 gives u⋆(xSi ) = s(xSi ; a⋆) = (Φ a⋆)i, hence yθ = Φ a⋆ + ε; substituting yields (32). For the thin (economy-size) SVD Φ = U ΣV ⊤ with U ⊤U = Ip,orthogonal V , and Σ = diag( σ1, . . . , σ p), one has (Φ ⊤Φ) −1Φ⊤ = V Σ−1U ⊤.Orthogonal invariance of the spectral norm gives ∥(Φ ⊤Φ) −1Φ⊤∥2 = ∥Σ−1∥2 =1/σ min (Φ) , and taking norms yields (33). 

Proof of Lemma 4.2. Equation (34) follows by adding and subtract-ing: s(x; ˆ a) − u⋆ = [s(x; ˆ a) − s(x; a⋆)] + [ s(x; a⋆) − u⋆], where linearity gives the first term and Assumption 4.2 makes the second term zero. Equation (35) is the same rearrangement around a†. For (36), write 

˜Φˆ a − u⋆v = ˜Φ(ˆ a − a†) + ( ˜Φa† − u⋆v) and apply the triangle inequality and submultiplicativity; the final specialization uses Lemma 4.1. 

Proof of Proposition 4.1. Equation (29) gives Jrefit (ˆ a) = 0 ⇐⇒ F(ˆ a) = 0 .By Assumption 4.3, Jrefit (ˆ a) = 0 . Equation (29) then gives F(ˆ a) = 0 .Assumptions 4.1 and 4.2 imply F(a⋆) = 0 . Indeed, s(·; a⋆) = u⋆ is the classical solution, so N [s(·; a⋆)] = f and Bℓ[s(·; a⋆)] = gℓ pointwise; hence all refinement residuals vanish at a⋆. Since Assumption 4.4 makes F injective on a neighborhood U containing both a⋆ and ˆa, the equality F(ˆ a) = F(a⋆) = 0 

implies ˆa = a⋆. Assumption 4.2 then gives s(·; ˆ a) = u⋆.Finally, F and Jrefit are built only from N , Bℓ, f , gℓ, the refinement points, and the refinement weights. They contain no teacher samples or reference-solution values once the topology, coefficient parameterization, and refinement point set are fixed, which proves (ii). Statement (iii) follows from the refinement procedure in Section 3.3: conditional on these fixed objects, the only teacher-dependent quantity entering the Stage-B optimization is the initialization a0(θ).

Proof of Corollary 4.1. For (a), the Hessian of Jβ 

> mix

is 2(Φ ⊤Φ + βA ⊤A). By (L-rank) and (PD), both Φ⊤Φ and A⊤A are positive definite; hence the Hessian is positive definite for every β > 0. The objective is therefore strictly convex, and its first-order optimality condition gives (39). For (b), (L-op) together with Assumptions 4.1–4.2 gives b = Aa ⋆. Sub-stituting yθ = Φ a⋆ + ε into (39) yields (40). 59 For (c), write M = A⊤A ≻ 0 and P = Φ ⊤Φ ≻ 0. Since 

βM + P = βM  I + β−1M −1P  , (A.1) for sufficiently large β, ∥β−1M −1P ∥2 < 1, so the Neumann expansion gives 

(βM + P )−1 = β−1M −1 − β−2M −1P M −1 + O(β−3). (A.2) Substitution into (40) gives (42). For (d), matrix inversion is continuous on the open set of invertible matrices, so the limit β → 0+ gives the teacher least-squares solution. For (e), Φ⊤Φ + βA ⊤A is invertible for every β > 0,and an invertible linear map preserves nonzero vectors. 

Proof of Proposition 4.2. Statement (a) follows by applying the chain rule to 

J(a) = ∥F(a)∥22.For (b), F(a⋆) = 0 eliminates the residual-dependent term in the Hessian, yielding 

∇2J(a⋆) = 2 DF(a⋆)⊤DF(a⋆). (A.3) By (R2), this matrix is positive definite. Moreover, J(a⋆) = 0 and, by part (a), ∇J(a⋆) = 0 . By continuity of ∇2J, after possibly shrinking to a suffi-ciently small convex neighborhood of a⋆, the Hessian remains uniformly pos-itive definite. Taylor’s theorem then gives the stated local strong-convexity lower bound, which implies that a⋆ is a strict local minimizer and the unique zero-residual point in that neighborhood. For (c), part (b) gives a nonsingular positive-definite Hessian at a⋆, and (R3) provides the required local Hessian regularity. The standard local New-ton theorem therefore yields quadratic convergence for all initializations in a sufficiently small neighborhood of a⋆. Because F(a⋆) = 0 , the residual-dependent part of the exact Hessian vanishes at the solution, so the Gauss– Newton Hessian approximation coincides with the exact Hessian there. Un-der (R1), the full-column-rank condition (R2), and the zero-residual property, the standard Gauss–Newton local convergence result likewise yields quadratic convergence. For (d), the equivalence follows from the stationarity equation and the identity 

ker DF(a)⊤ =  col DF(a)⊥. (A.4) At a spurious stationary point, F(a)̸ = 0 , and therefore J(a) = ∥F(a)∥22 >

0.60 Appendix B. Benchmark definitions and fixed configurations 

The governing equations, domains, constraints, reference solutions, and problem-specific unary operators for the 18 configurations are summarized in Table B.1. 61 Table B.1: Benchmark definitions for the 18 configurations. The table lists the governing equations, computational domains, prescribed constraints, reference solutions, and problem-specific unary operators.  Here,  u⋆ denotes the analytic reference solution used, where applicable, to construct manufactured forcing terms and prescribed boundary or initial data, and  ∂Ωx

> denotes the spatial boundary for time-dependent problems.  For the Kovasznay case,  u = ( u, v ) denotes the velocity field. Complete search-operator settings are given in Table B.3.
> ID  Problem  Governing equation  Domain  Constraints  Reference solution  Problem-specific unary operators 01  Param. Poisson  uxx  + 16 sin(4 x) = 0  [0 , 1]  u(0) = 0 , u(1) = sin 4  sin(4 x) {sin }
> 02  Multifreq. Poisson  uxx  + 0 .49 sin(0 .7x) + 2 .25 cos(1 .5x) = 0  [−10 , 10]  u(±10) =  u⋆(±10)  −0.1x + sin(0 .7x) + cos(1 .5x) {sin , cos }
> 03  Euler–Bernoulli  u(4)  = 5  × 10 −5 [32]  [0 , 10]  u(0) =  u(10) =  u′′ (0) =  u′′ (10) = 0  5×10 −5
> 24  (x4 − 20 x3 + 1000 x) –04  Conv.–diff.  0.2uxx  − ux = 0  [0 , 1]  u(0) = 0 , u(1) = 1  (e5x − 1) /(e5 − 1)  {exp }
> 05  Sine–Poisson 1D  uxx  + π2 sin( πx ) = 0  [32]  [0 , 1]  u(0) =  u(1) = 0  sin( πx ) {sin }
> 06  Diffusion  ut − uxx  + (1  − π2)e−t sin( πx ) = 0  [23, 29]  [−1, 1]  × [0 , 1]  u(±1, t ) = 0 , u(x,  0) = sin( πx ) e−t sin( πx ) {sin , exp }
> 07a  Wave  utt  − uxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , π ] × [0 , 1]  u(0 , t ) =  u(π, t ) =  u(x,  0) = 0 , ut(x,  0) = sin  x sin  t sin  x {sin }
> 07b  Telegraph-1  utt  + 2 ut + u − uxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0) , ut(·, 0) = ( u⋆)t(·, 0)  e1.5x−2.5t {exp }
> 08  Telegraph-2  utt  + 1 .76 ut + 0 .88 2u − uxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0) , ut(·, 0) = ( u⋆)t(·, 0)  e0.88 x + e−0.88 t {exp }
> 09a  Fokker–Planck-1  ut − ux − uxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0)  x + t {exp }
> 09b  Fokker–Planck-2  ut − xu x − 12 x2uxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0)  xe t {exp }
> 09c  Fokker–Planck-3  ut − (x + 1) ux − x2etuxx  = 0  [28]  [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0)  (x + 1) et {exp }
> 10  Klein–Gordon  utt  − uxx  + u3 = f , f = u⋆tt  − u⋆xx  + ( u⋆)3 [0 , 1] 2 u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0) , ut(x,  0) = 0  x cos(5 πt ) +  x3t3 {cos }
> 11  Helmholtz  uxx  + uyy  + u = (1  − 32 π2) sin(4 πx ) sin(4 πy ) [−1, 1] 2 u = 0  on  ∂Ω sin(4 πx ) sin(4 πy ) {sin }
> 12  Sine–Poisson 3D  ∆u + 3 π2 Q
> q∈{ x,y,z } sin( πq ) = 0  [32]  [0 , 1] 3 u = 0  on  ∂Ω sin( πx ) sin( πy ) sin( πz ) {sin }
> 13  Burgers  ut + uu x − 0.05 uxx  = 0  [−1, 1]  × [0 , 1]  u|∂Ωx = u⋆|∂Ωx , u(·, 0) =  u⋆(·, 0)  0.5 − 0.5 tanh(5 x − 2.5t) {tanh }
> 14  Kovasznay  u · ∇ u + ∇p − ν∇2u = 0 , ∇ ·  u = 0 , Re = 20 , ν = 1 /Re , λ = Re /2 −
> q
> Re 2/4 + 4 π2 [28, 23]  [−0.5, 1]  × [−0.5, 1.5]  u|∂Ω = u⋆|∂Ω, v|∂Ω = v⋆|∂Ω; p(0 , 0) = 0
> u = 1  − eλx  cos(2 πy )
> {sin , cos , exp }v = λ
> 2π eλx  sin(2 πy )
> p = 12 (1  − e2λx )
> 15  Sine–Poisson 2D  ∆u + 2 π2 sin( πx ) sin( πy ) = 0  [32]  [0 , 1] 2 u = 0  on  ∂Ω sin( πx ) sin( πy ) {sin }

62 The fixed numerical settings are consolidated by configuration ID in Ta-bles B.2 and B.3. 

Appendix B.1. PINN and sampling settings 

Table B.2: PINN architectures and sampling settings for the 18 configurations. A notation such as 3 × 40 denotes three hidden layers with 40 neurons per layer. Training-point counts are reported in the order interior/boundary/initial, with a dash indicating that the corresponding point class is not used. These counts refer to sampled locations rather than the number of scalar residual components, since multiple conditions may be imposed at the same location. The Kovasznay pressure anchor is an additional point constraint and is not included in the boundary-location count. NS denotes the number of frozen-teacher samples used for Stage-A symbolic search. N val  

> r

and N fr denote the numbers of interior equation-residual points used for physics validation and Stage-B coefficient refinement, respectively; constraint terms use their separately prescribed constraint point sets. 

ID Problem Hidden layers Training points NS N val  

> r

N fr

01 Param. Poisson 3 × 40 512/2/– 400 2000 2000 02 Multifreq. Poisson 3 × 50 400/2/– 800 2000 2000 03 Euler–Bernoulli 4 × 50 1024/4/– 1000 2000 2000 04 Conv.–diff. 3 × 30 256/2/– 800 2001 2000 05 Sine–Poisson 1D 4 × 50 512/2/– 500 2000 2000 06 Diffusion 3 × 50 7500/600/600 3000 10000 5000 07a Wave 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 07b Telegraph-1 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 08 Telegraph-2 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 09a Fokker–Planck-1 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 09b Fokker–Planck-2 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 09c Fokker–Planck-3 4 × 50 2601/80/80 2000 5000 4000 10 Klein–Gordon 4 × 64 5000/2000/2000 1000 5000 4000 11 Helmholtz 4 × 50 8000/800/– 2000 5000 4000 12 Sine–Poisson 3D 4 × 50 10000/1200/– 4000 10000 8000 13 Burgers 3 × 50 4000/800/1000 2000 10000 5000 14 Kovasznay 3 × 50 10000/1200/– 3000 10000 6000 15 Sine–Poisson 2D 4 × 50 3000/400/– 2000 5000 4000 

63 Appendix B.2. Symbolic-search and refinement settings 

Table B.3: Symbolic-search settings for the 18 configurations. Ten independently seeded symbolic-search runs are performed per PINN teacher, and each run retains up to five rep-resentative candidates by the Stage-A Pareto-front retention rule. Configuration-specific refinement-point counts are reported in Table B.2; additional coupled-search and refine-ment settings for Kovasznay are given below.                                                                                                                                                                        

> ID Problem Binary operators Unary operators Iterations ×populations Max. size 01 Param. Poisson +,−,×, / sin 80 ×12 25 02 Multifreq. Poisson +,−,×, / sin ,cos 100 ×16 30 03 Euler–Bernoulli +,−,×–100 ×16 20 04 Conv.–diff. +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 05 Sine–Poisson 1D ×sin 100 ×16 15 06 Diffusion +,−,×sin ,exp 100 ×16 25 07a Wave +,−,×, / sin 100 ×16 30 07b Telegraph-1 +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 08 Telegraph-2 +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 09a Fokker–Planck-1 +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 09b Fokker–Planck-2 +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 09c Fokker–Planck-3 +,−,×, / exp 100 ×16 30 10 Klein–Gordon +,−,×, / cos 100 ×16 30 11 Helmholtz +,−,×, / sin 80 ×12 30 12 Sine–Poisson 3D ×sin 100 ×16 25 13 Burgers +,−,×, / tanh 100 ×16 30 14 Kovasznay +,−,×sin ,cos ,exp 100 ×16 30 15 Sine–Poisson 2D ×sin 100 ×16 20

For the coupled Kovasznay configuration, the fieldwise shortlist contains at most 12 candidates per field. Candidate groups are formed by the Carte-sian product of these shortlists and evaluated on a 750-point subset of the full refinement set. Before screening refinement, the groups are ranked lex-icographically by joint physics score, mean teacher-relative L2 error, and total search complexity. The 16 highest-ranked groups then undergo joint screening refinement using one initialization and at most 1000 residual eval-uations. The coupled Stage-C gates described in Section 3.5 are applied to the screened groups, after which the selected topology group is re-estimated on the complete set of 6000 refinement points using the standard multi-start settings. Shared-factor augmentation scans multiplicative factors of the form 

exp( rx q) whose exponent is linear in a single independent variable and whose rate satisfies |r| ≥ 10 −10 . Rate observations are processed in increas-ing order of |r| and assigned to the first compatible cluster. Rates associated 64 with the same variable and sign are compatible when 

|r − rc| ≤ 0.35 max {| rc|, |r|, 10 −12 }, (B.1) where rc is the current cluster median. A cluster is eligible only when it is supported by at least two fields. Eligible clusters are ordered by decreasing cross-field support, followed by increasing median search-stage loss, rate dis-persion, and absolute median rate; the first two are retained. Within each field, trigonometric factors are ordered by their originating candidate loss, expression-tree size, and symbolic string, and at most three are used. The retained median rates and trigonometric factors generate at most six addi-tional candidates per field, selected by alternating teacher-fit and complexity rankings. Joint coefficient sharing is used here for the Kovasznay base-rate relation, whose recovered cross-field exponential factors depend on x. Two exponential rates are treated as numerically equal when 

|r − r′| < 10 −9 max {1, |r|, |r′|} . (B.2) A numerically matched rate occurring in at least two fields defines a shared base parameter. Shared base rates are recorded in first-occurrence order under the implemented field-and-atom traversal. Each observed rate r is tested against that ordered list and tied to the first base rate rb for which 

k = round( r/r b) ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4} and |r/r b − k| ≤ 10 −8; it is then represented by k times the corresponding shared parameter. Rates that satisfy none of these conditions remain field-specific. 

Appendix C. Detailed numerical results 

The main text reports configuration-level medians in Table 4. The con-solidated table below supplements those results with across-seed dispersion, avoiding repetition of the same 18 configurations in multiple class-specific layouts. 65 Table C.1:  Across-seed performance distributions for the 18 benchmark configurations.  Relative  L2 errors are reported as median [first quartile, third quartile] over five independently initialized PINN teachers.  Pre-refit denotes the search-stage expression corresponding to the candidate ultimately selected after refinement and Stage-C selection. The complexity column reports the range of final expression complexity across the five seeds. 

> ID  Problem  PINN rel.  L2 Pre-refit rel.  L2 Refined rel.  L2 Final complexity range 01  Param. Poisson  1.09  × 10 −5 [8.80  × 10 −6, 1.25  × 10 −5] 9.82  × 10 −6 [8.47  × 10 −6, 1.76  × 10 −5] 0† [0†, 0†] 4–4 02  Multifreq. Poisson  4.29  × 10 −3 [3.59  × 10 −3, 1.76  × 10 −2] 3.90  × 10 −3 [3.38  × 10 −3, 1.76  × 10 −2] 7.84  × 10 −17  [7.84  × 10 −17 , 5.36  × 10 −16 ] 12–12 03  Euler–Bernoulli  6.42  × 10 −6 [5.95  × 10 −6, 1.45  × 10 −5] 1.69  × 10 −3 [7.88  × 10 −4, 1.01  × 10 −2] 1.03  × 10 −14  [3.03  × 10 −15 , 1.05  × 10 −14 ] 14–14 04  Conv.–diff.  4.34  × 10 −5 [2.93  × 10 −5, 1.09  × 10 −4] 4.71  × 10 −4 [4.89  × 10 −5, 5.11  × 10 −4] 4.09  × 10 −16  [4.09  × 10 −16 , 1.60  × 10 −15 ] 8–8 05  Sine–Poisson 1D  5.42  × 10 −6 [1.31  × 10 −6, 7.00  × 10 −6] 1.87  × 10 −5 [9.80  × 10 −6, 2.31  × 10 −5] 1.98  × 10 −15  [1.98  × 10 −15 , 1.98  × 10 −15 ] 4–4 06  Diffusion  8.92  × 10 −5 [7.39  × 10 −5, 2.33  × 10 −4] 1.29  × 10 −5 [1.21  × 10 −5, 1.86  × 10 −5] 1.94  × 10 −15  [1.94  × 10 −15 , 1.94  × 10 −15 ] 9–9 07a  Wave  2.44  × 10 −4 [2.40  × 10 −4, 2.64  × 10 −4] 0† [0†, 0†] 0† [0†, 0†] 5–5 07b  Telegraph-1  3.75  × 10 −4 [2.97  × 10 −4, 4.52  × 10 −4] 1.90  × 10 −4 [1.78  × 10 −4, 3.30  × 10 −4] 0† [0†, 0†] 8–8 08  Telegraph-2  5.54  × 10 −5 [4.75  × 10 −5, 5.63  × 10 −5] 1.50  × 10 −5 [1.01  × 10 −5, 2.02  × 10 −5] 0† [0†, 0†] 9–9 09a  Fokker–Planck-1  2.11  × 10 −4 [1.11  × 10 −4, 2.60  × 10 −4] 0† [0†, 0†] 0† [0†, 0†] 3–3 09b  Fokker–Planck-2  5.57  × 10 −4 [3.71  × 10 −4, 7.55  × 10 −4] 0† [0†, 0†] 0† [0†, 0†] 4–4 09c  Fokker–Planck-3  1.35  × 10 −4 [6.81  × 10 −5, 2.25  × 10 −4] 2.17  × 10 −5 [5.43  × 10 −7, 3.89  × 10 −5] 0† [0†, 0†] 6–6 10  Klein–Gordon  9.27  × 10 −3 [7.75  × 10 −3, 1.16  × 10 −2] 6.95  × 10 −4 [3.17  × 10 −4, 1.31  × 10 −3] 1.85  × 10 −14  [1.85  × 10 −14 , 1.85  × 10 −14 ] 14–14 11  Helmholtz  4.94  × 10 −2 [4.68  × 10 −2, 4.96  × 10 −2] 6.52  × 10 −3 [6.32  × 10 −3, 1.92  × 10 −2] 2.31  × 10 −14  [2.31  × 10 −14 , 2.31  × 10 −14 ] 9–9 12  Sine–Poisson 3D  1.96  × 10 −4 [1.89  × 10 −4, 2.08  × 10 −4] 4.07  × 10 −5 [1.80  × 10 −5, 6.77  × 10 −5] 3.52  × 10 −15  [3.52  × 10 −15 , 3.52  × 10 −15 ] 13–13 13  Burgers  6.47  × 10 −4 [4.88  × 10 −4, 8.99  × 10 −4] 3.92  × 10 −4 [2.59  × 10 −4, 4.60  × 10 −4] 3.71  × 10 −17  [3.71  × 10 −17 , 3.71  × 10 −17 ] 12–12 14  Kovasznay  2.72  × 10 −3 [1.44  × 10 −3, 2.78  × 10 −3] 2.65  × 10 −3 [1.35  × 10 −3, 2.71  × 10 −3] 3.13  × 10 −15  [2.47  × 10 −15 , 1.73  × 10 −14 ] 30–35 15  Sine–Poisson 2D  4.39  × 10 −5 [3.71  × 10 −5, 5.04  × 10 −5] 3.10  × 10 −5 [2.98  × 10 −5, 3.38  × 10 −5] 2.84  × 10 −15  [2.84  × 10 −15 , 2.84  × 10 −15 ] 9–9
> † Stored as an exact floating-point zero; no display floor was applied.

66 Appendix C.1. Candidate-pool coverage under repeated searches 

Table C.2 gives the configuration-level breakdown under the first-K replay used in Fig. 6. Each entry counts successful end-to-end recoveries among five independently trained PINN teachers for the indicated configuration. The separately seeded symbolic searches enlarge the candidate pool for a fixed teacher and are not additional independent replicates. 

Table C.2: Configuration-level end-to-end recovery under the first-K candidate-pool re-play. Entries report successful recoveries out of five independently trained PINN teachers; success requires the selected refined expression to have relative L2 error no larger than 

10 −10 . The last column gives the smallest tested K for which all five teacher-level in-stances are recovered.                                                                                      

> Configuration K= 1 K= 2 K= 3 K= 5 K= 10 Smallest K(5/5) Parametric Poisson 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Multifrequency Poisson 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Euler–Bernoulli 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Convection–diffusion 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Diffusion 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Wave 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Telegraph-1 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Klein–Gordon 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Fokker–Planck-1 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Helmholtz 3/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 2Sine–Poisson 3D 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1Burgers 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 5/5 1

For the Helmholtz library-enrichment study in Table 6, we audit whether candidates belonging to the prescribed target family appear on the raw Pareto fronts and whether they are subsequently retained for Stage B re-finement. The raw-front and retained-pool counts coincide under all three settings, indicating that no target-family candidate recognized by this audit is discarded during candidate retention. The prescribed family is C sin( ax +

b) sin( cy + d) + e. Because this is a strict structural predicate, the audit may undercount more general expression trees that become equivalent to the target only after coefficient refinement and symbolic simplification. 67 Table C.3: Structural audit of the raw Pareto fronts and retained Stage-B pools for the Helmholtz library-enrichment study. Entries report the number of teacher instances for which the corresponding set contains at least one candidate belonging to the prescribed family C sin( ax + b) sin( cy + d) + e.                  

> Condition Raw fronts Retained pools Successful refits Baseline, K= 2 5/55/55/5
> Enriched, K= 2 2/52/52/5
> Enriched, K= 5 5/55/55/5

68 Appendix C.2. Coefficient-refinement objective ablation Linear fixed-topology parameterizations..  The table below reports the fixed bases and slope estimates un-derlying Fig. 8. Each row uses five independently initialized PINN teachers, giving 30 teacher instances in total. 

> Table C.4: Linear fixed-topology objective ablation used for the theory-aligned experiment in Fig. 8.  Each basis admits an exact representation of the solution and is linear in its  p coefficients. The tail slope is the least-squares slope of  log 10  relative
> L2 error against  log 10  β over the last three finite-weight points whose median error exceeds the numerical accuracy floor of
> 10 −15 . The fitted  β values are listed for each problem.
> Problem  Fixed basis  s(x; a) p Teachers  Slope-fit  β values  Tail slope Multifrequency Poisson  a1x + a2 sin(0 .7x) +  a3 cos(1 .5x) 3 5 {10 6, 10 8, 10 10 } −1.000
> Euler–Bernoulli  a1x + a2x2 + a3x3 + a4x4 4 5 {10 6, 10 8, 10 10 } −0.999
> Convection–diffusion  a1 + a2e5x 2 5 {10 4, 10 6, 10 8} −0.999
> Diffusion  a1e−t sin( πx ) 1 5 {10 2, 10 4, 10 6} −1.000
> Helmholtz  a1 sin(4 πx ) sin(4 πy ) 1 5 {10 2, 10 4, 10 6} −1.001
> Sine–Poisson 1D  a1 sin( πx ) 1 5 {1, 10 2, 10 4} −0.999
> Recovered fixed topologies..
> Table C.5: Coefficient-refinement objective ablation across 50 problem–seed combinations from ten scalar configurations with free coefficients. Relative  L2 errors and equation residuals  Req  are reported as median [first quartile, third quartile]. Equation residuals are evaluated on the independent interior verification points using the definition in Section 3.4.
> Objective  n Relative  L2 error  Equation residual  Req
> Teacher-only  50  8.85  × 10 −5 [6.81  × 10 −6, 5.51  × 10 −4] 1.92  × 10 −4 [3.84  × 10 −5, 2.25  × 10 −3]Mixed,  β = 10 0 50  1.44  × 10 −7 [6.58  × 10 −9, 2.06  × 10 −5] 2.14  × 10 −7 [3.44  × 10 −8, 7.57  × 10 −6]Mixed,  β = 10 2 50  1.45  × 10 −9 [6.58  × 10 −11 , 9.08  × 10 −7] 3.68  × 10 −9 [5.94  × 10 −10 , 7.56  × 10 −8]Mixed,  β = 10 4 50  1.45  × 10 −11  [6.58  × 10 −13 , 9.61  × 10 −9] 8.94  × 10 −11  [8.62  × 10 −12 , 7.57  × 10 −10 ]Mixed,  β = 10 6 50  1.45  × 10 −13  [6.88  × 10 −15 , 9.61  × 10 −11 ] 9.14  × 10 −13  [8.66  × 10 −14 , 7.58  × 10 −12 ]Physics-only  50  1.86  × 10 −17  [0†, 1.07  × 10 −16 ] 4.53  × 10 −17  [0†, 7.03  × 10 −16 ]
> † Stored as an exact floating-point zero; no display floor was applied.

69 Appendix C.3. Initialization sensitivity 

> Table C.6: Initialization sensitivity of fixed-topology coefficient refinement for ten scalar configurations with free coefficients. For each of five PINN seeds per configuration, one teacher-derived initialization is compared with five independent random initializations drawn from  U (−1, 1) , yielding  nT = 5  and  nR = 25  per configuration.  Post-refinement relative  L2 errors are reported as median [first quartile, third quartile].
> Problem  nT Teacher-derived init.  nR Random init.  Random-init. range Param. Poisson  5 0† [0†, 0†] 25  1.02  × 10 0 [1.02  × 10 0, 1.02  × 10 0] 0†–1.02  × 10 0
> Multifreq. Poisson  5 1.79  × 10 −15  [9.11  × 10 −16 , 7.79  × 10 −14 ] 25  1.02  × 10 0 [7.94  × 10 −1, 1.02  × 10 0] 7.88  × 10 −1–1.02  × 10 0
> Euler–Bernoulli  5 6.65  × 10 −16  [5.88  × 10 −16 , 8.11  × 10 −16 ] 25  5.88  × 10 −16  [5.88  × 10 −16 , 4.70  × 10 −14 ] 4.65  × 10 −16 –2.59  × 10 −13
> Conv.–diff.  5 4.84  × 10 −16  [4.39  × 10 −16 , 5.64  × 10 −16 ] 25  1.21  × 10 0 [1.21  × 10 0, 1.21  × 10 0] 1.21  × 10 0–1.21  × 10 0
> Diffusion  5 0† [0†, 0†] 25  8.04  × 10 −1 [8.04  × 10 −1, 8.04  × 10 −1] 0†–8.04  × 10 −1
> Telegraph-1  5 2.04  × 10 −16  [0†, 9.60  × 10 −16 ] 25  0† [0†, 0†] 0†–0†
> Klein–Gordon  5 1.07  × 10 −16  [1.07  × 10 −16 , 1.07  × 10 −16 ] 25  1.69  × 10 0 [1.69  × 10 0, 1.69  × 10 0] 1.69  × 10 0–1.69  × 10 0
> Helmholtz  5 0† [0†, 0†] 25  1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0] 1 × 10 0–1 × 10 0
> Sine–Poisson 3D  5 0† [0†, 0†] 25  1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0] 0†–1 × 10 0
> Burgers  5 2.58  × 10 −14  [7.71  × 10 −17 , 2.95  × 10 −14 ] 25  9.59  × 10 −17  [7.50  × 10 −17 , 7.02  × 10 −16 ] 3.71  × 10 −17 –7.02  × 10 −15
> † Stored as an exact floating-point zero; no display floor was applied.

70 Appendix C.4. Sensitivity to Perturbations in Prescribed Constraints 

This supplementary study isolates the sensitivity of fixed-topology coef-ficient refinement to perturbations in the prescribed constraints. The gov-erning equation is kept unperturbed, while the symbolic topology is fixed to a target-capable form; independent Gaussian noise is introduced only into the prescribed boundary or initial values. For each nonzero noise level 

η ∈ { 10 −6, 10 −4, 10 −2}, five independent perturbation draws are generated for Multifrequency Poisson, Helmholtz, and Burgers, with perturbation stan-dard deviation η max {RMS( g), 1}. The coefficients are then re-estimated using the standard physics-only refinement objective with λrefit  

> c

= 100 . Rel-ative errors are evaluated against the unperturbed reference solution, while governing-equation residuals are evaluated using the unperturbed equation at independent interior points. All 48 refits, including the three clean baselines, are recorded as con-verged. As shown in Fig. C.1, both the solution error and governing-equation residual generally increase with η, with problem-dependent sensitivity. At 

η = 10 −2, the median relative L2 errors are 6.20 × 10 −4, 3.68 × 10 −7, and 

7.20 × 10 −4 for Multifrequency Poisson, Helmholtz, and Burgers, respec-tively. These results provide empirical sensitivity evidence for the tested fixed-topology refinement protocol only; they neither establish a general noise-stability guarantee nor characterize end-to-end symbolic discovery un-der noisy observations. 71 0 10 6 10 4 10 2       

> Constraint-noise level
> 10 16
> 10 14
> 10 12
> 10 10
> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> Clean-reference relative  L2 error

(a) Solution error              

> Multifrequency Poisson Helmholtz Burgers
> 010 610 410 2
> Constraint-noise level
> 10 16
> 10 14
> 10 12
> 10 10
> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> Clean equation residual RMS

(b) Governing-equation residual Figure C.1: Empirical sensitivity of fixed-topology physics-only coefficient refinement to perturbations in the prescribed constraints. The symbolic topology is fixed to a target-capable form and the governing equation remains unperturbed; independent Gaussian noise is applied only to the prescribed boundary or initial values. Markers denote medians, and error bars indicate the first and third quartiles over five independent draws at each nonzero noise level. The clean baseline consists of one deterministic run per configuration. 

72 Appendix C.5. Rank and conditioning diagnostics 

> Table C.7: Rank and conditioning diagnostics for the Jacobian  DF(ˆ a) of the discrete refinement-residual map evaluated at the refined coefficients. The full-rank counts are those recorded in the finite-precision rank audit. For runs with free coefficients, the minimum singular value and condition number are reported as median [first quartile, third quartile] over five PINN seeds. Zero-parameter runs are reported separately, for which rank and conditioning metrics are not applicable.
> Problem  Runs  Free-param. runs  Full-rank runs  Zero-param. runs  σmin  Condition number Param. Poisson  5 5 5 0 4.29  × 10 2 [4.29  × 10 2, 4.29  × 10 2] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Multifreq. Poisson  5 5 5 0 7.96  × 10 1 [7.96  × 10 1, 7.96  × 10 1] 5.73  × 10 0 [5.73  × 10 0, 5.73  × 10 0]Euler–Bernoulli  5 5 5 0 1.06  × 10 0 [1.06  × 10 0, 1.06  × 10 0] 9.58  × 10 4 [9.58  × 10 4, 9.58  × 10 4]Conv.–diff.  5 5 5 0 9.93  × 10 0 [9.93  × 10 0, 9.93  × 10 0] 1.49  × 10 2 [1.49  × 10 2, 1.49  × 10 2]Diffusion  5 5 5 0 3.07  × 10 2 [3.07  × 10 2, 3.07  × 10 2] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Wave  5 0 0 5 – –Telegraph-1  5 5 5 0 3.70  × 10 2 [3.70  × 10 2, 3.70  × 10 2] 2.70  × 10 0 [2.70  × 10 0, 2.70  × 10 0]Telegraph-2  5 5 5 0 1.81  × 10 2 [7.60  × 10 1, 1.81  × 10 2] 2.34  × 10 0 [2.34  × 10 0, 8.62  × 10 0]Klein–Gordon  5 5 5 0 3.82  × 10 3 [3.82  × 10 3, 3.82  × 10 3] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Fokker–Planck-1  5 0 0 5 – –Fokker–Planck-2  5 0 0 5 – –Fokker–Planck-3  5 0 0 5 – –Helmholtz  5 5 5 0 8.12  × 10 3 [8.12  × 10 3, 8.12  × 10 3] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Sine–Poisson 3D  5 5 5 0 9.81  × 10 2 [9.81  × 10 2, 9.81  × 10 2] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Burgers  5 5 5 0 4.77  × 10 0 [4.77  × 10 0, 4.77  × 10 0] 9.26  × 10 1 [9.26  × 10 1, 9.26  × 10 1]Sine–Poisson 1D  5 5 5 0 2.37  × 10 2 [2.37  × 10 2, 2.37  × 10 2] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]Sine–Poisson 2D  5 5 5 0 5.62  × 10 2 [5.62  × 10 2, 5.62  × 10 2] 1 × 10 0 [1 × 10 0, 1 × 10 0]

73 Appendix D. Additional numerical figures 

The figures below provide grouped recovery profiles, field-level visualiza-tions, and distribution-level diagnostics that complement the representative evidence presented in the main text. Representative profile and field figures use one PINN seed per configuration: the seed whose PINN relative L2 error is closest to the five-seed median. All methods shown within a configuration use that same PINN seed. For logarithmic pointwise-error visualizations, stored zeros and values below the displayed numerical floor are shown at that plotting floor. −10 0 10 −2 02                

> u(x)
> Multifreq. Poisson
> Reference PINN DeSyR 0510 0.000 0.002 0.004 0.006
> Euler--Bernoulli
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Conv.--diffusion
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> Sine--Poisson 1D
> −10 010
> x
> 10 −14
> 10 −11
> 10 −8
> 10 −5
> 10 −2
> Absolute error
> 0510
> x
> 10 −17
> 10 −14
> 10 −11
> 10 −8
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> x
> 10 −17
> 10 −13
> 10 −9
> 10 −5
> 0.0 0.5 1.0
> x
> 10 −15
> 10 −12
> 10 −9
> 10 −6

Figure D.1: Representative one-dimensional recovery profiles. The upper row compares the reference solution, PINN teacher, and refined DeSyR expression for Multifrequency Poisson, Euler–Bernoulli, Convection–diffusion, and Sine–Poisson 1D. The lower row shows the corresponding pointwise absolute errors of the PINN and DeSyR solutions. 

74 −0.5 0.0 0.5 0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Diffusion
> t

a Reference 

−0.5 0.0 0.5 

b PINN absolute error 

−0.5 0.0 0.5 

c DeSyR absolute error 

1 2 30.25 0.50 0.75 

> Wave
> t

1 2 3 1 2 30.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Telegraph-1
> t

0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Telegraph-2
> t

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −5.0 −2.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −4 −2 02410 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4

Figure D.2: Space–time recovery results for Diffusion, Wave, Telegraph-1, and Telegraph-2. Rows correspond to the four benchmark configurations, while columns show the reference field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR expression. The PINN and DeSyR absolute-error maps within each row use the same logarithmic color scale. 

75 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Fokker--Planck-1
> t

a Reference 

0.25 0.50 0.75 

b PINN absolute error 

0.25 0.50 0.75 

c DeSyR absolute error 

0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Fokker--Planck-2
> t

0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Fokker--Planck-3
> t

0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

0.25 0.50 0.75 

> Klein--Gordon
> t

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

> −2 −1 01210 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −3.0 −1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −6 −3 03610 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> −1.6 −0.8 0.0 0.8 1.6 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4

Figure D.3: Space–time recovery results for Fokker–Planck-1, Fokker–Planck-2, Fokker– Planck-3, and Klein–Gordon. Rows correspond to the four benchmark configurations, while columns show the reference field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR expression. The PINN and DeSyR absolute-error maps within each row use the same logarithmic color scale. 

76 0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 

> Sine--Poisson 2D
> y

a Reference 

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

b PINN absolute error 

0.25 0.50 0.75 

x

c DeSyR absolute error 

−1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 10 −16 

10 −12 

10 −8 

10 −4 Figure D.4: Two-dimensional recovery results for Sine–Poisson 2D. The panels show the reference field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR expression. The PINN and DeSyR absolute-error maps use the same logarithmic color scale. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

y  

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> z
> Plane x= 0.5

a Reference      

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

y

b PINN absolute error      

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

y

c DeSyR absolute error      

> 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x       

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> z
> Plane y= 0.5
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x     

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x     

> 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x       

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> y
> Plane z= 0.5
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x     

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

x

> 10 −16
> 10 −12
> 10 −8
> 10 −4

Figure D.5: Three-dimensional recovery results for Sine–Poisson 3D on the orthogonal central planes x = 0 .5, y = 0 .5, and z = 0 .5. Columns show the reference field, the pointwise absolute error of the PINN teacher, and the pointwise absolute error of the refined DeSyR expression. Within each row, the PINN and DeSyR absolute-error maps use the same logarithmic color scale. 

77 10 −17 10 −15 10 −13 10 −11 10 −9 10 −7 10 −5 10 −3 10 −1 

Seed-level relative L2 error 

Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Wave Telegraph-1 Telegraph-2 Klein--Gordon Fokker--Planck-1 Fokker--Planck-2 Fokker--Planck-3 Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers Kovasznay Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D 

PINN Pre-refit Refined Figure D.6: Seed-level relative L2 errors for all 18 configurations. For each configuration, the PINN, pre-refit, and refined errors are shown separately for each of the five PINN seeds. Markers within the floor region indicate stored floating-point zero values. 

78 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 

Final expression complexity 

> Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Wave Telegraph-1 Telegraph-2 Klein--Gordon Fokker--Planck-1 Fokker--Planck-2 Fokker--Planck-3 Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers Kovasznay Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D

Figure D.7: Final expression complexity across the five PINN seeds for all 18 configu-rations. Coincident markers indicate identical final complexities across seeds, while the Kovasznay spread reflects algebraically equivalent representations of the coupled solution. 

79 10 2 10 3

Wall-clock time (s)  

> Param. Poisson Multifreq. Poisson Euler--Bernoulli Conv.--diffusion Diffusion Wave Telegraph-1 Telegraph-2 Klein--Gordon Fokker--Planck-1 Fokker--Planck-2 Fokker--Planck-3 Helmholtz Sine--Poisson 3D Burgers Kovasznay Sine--Poisson 1D Sine--Poisson 2D
> PINN training Symbolic recovery

Figure D.8: Configuration-level wall-clock times for the 18 configurations. Markers de-note medians and horizontal intervals indicate interquartile ranges for PINN training and the symbolic-recovery stage, which includes symbolic search, coefficient refinement, and the subsequent Stage-C selection and verification operations. Diffusion has no recorded training time, while Burgers training is summarized over four runs; all other reported summaries use five runs. 

80 Table D.1: Stage-wise wall-clock costs for five representative configurations spanning dis-tinct computational regimes. Values are medians over available recorded runs. Training and recovery counts are reported separately because some PINN teachers were loaded from existing checkpoints. Recovery includes symbolic search, coefficient refinement, and the subsequent Stage-C selection and verification operations. The total-time count gives the number of per-seed end-to-end pipeline timings used for the total-time median; when a teacher is loaded from a checkpoint, that timing includes checkpoint loading in place of PINN training. Total time is computed per run before taking the median and therefore need not equal the sum of the reported stage-wise medians. Timeouts count candidate-refinement attempts that reached the configured per-candidate time limit and can there-fore exceed the number of recovery runs. Timings are hardware- and implementation-dependent.                                                 

> ID Problem ntrain Training (s) nrec Recovery (s) ntotal Total time Timeouts 01 Param. Poisson 522.8 577.0 599.8 s 003 Euler–Bernoulli 5542.1 5114.9 5655.2 s 007a Wave 5298.2 51165.5 524.8 min 11 11 Helmholtz 5743.1 5645.9 523.1 min 10 13 Burgers 4225.0 51059.9 518.6 min 6

81 0 2 4 6 8 10 12         

> Candidate pools (out of 60)
> Full rules No convergence-eligibility gate No teacher gate No physics-equivalence gate No complexity preference
> a
> Expression changed Complexity changed Unconverged selected 10 −13 10 −11 10 −9 10 −7 10 −5 10 −3
> Worst selected relative L2error
> unconverged candidate
> bFull-rules worst case

Figure D.9: Stage-C selection-gate replay on 60 frozen scalar candidate pools. Panel (a) reports how many final selections change when each rule is removed, including changes in expression, complexity, and convergence status; absent bars indicate zero changes. Panel (b) shows the corresponding worst selected relative L2 error, with the dashed line marking the worst case under the full rule set. Removing the convergence-eligibility gate admits one unconverged candidate and substantially degrades the worst-case error, whereas removing the complexity preference changes 12 selections without increasing the worst error. The teacher-compatibility and physics-equivalence gates are inactive in these archived pools and therefore do not change the final selections in this replay. 

82 Acknowledgements 

The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11971337), the Gen-eral Research Fund of the Hong Kong Research Grants Council (Grant Nos. 15221123 and 15216424), and the Sichuan Provincial Department of Science and Technology (Project No. 2026NSFSC0138). This work was also supported by the Key Laboratory of Numerical Simulation of Sichuan Provincial Universities (Grant No. KLNS-2023SZFZ002), the project “Con-struction of a Remote Sensing Monitoring and Service System for the Ecological Environment of Typical Nature Reserves in Aba Prefecture” (Project No. R25CGZH0005), the Key Laboratory of Mathematical Meteo-rology (Grant No. 2025Z0340), and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University Internal Research Fund (Grant Nos. P0058468 and P0056171). 

Data availability 

The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial inter-ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

References 

[1] R. J. LeVeque, Finite difference methods for ordinary and partial dif-ferential equations: steady-state and time-dependent problems, SIAM, 2007. [2] S. C. Brenner, L. R. Scott, The mathematical theory of finite element methods, Springer, 2008. [3] L. N. Trefethen, Spectral methods in MATLAB, SIAM, 2000. [4] J. Sirignano, K. Spiliopoulos, DGM: a deep learning algorithm for solv-ing partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics 375 (2018) 1339–1364. 83 [5] B. Yu, et al., The Deep Ritz method: a deep learning-based numerical algorithm for solving variational problems, Communications in Mathe-matics and Statistics 6 (1) (2018) 1–12. [6] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218–229. [7] Z. Li, N. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. Liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stu-art, A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator for parametric partial dif-ferential equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 (2020). [8] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: a deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics 378 (2019) 686–707. [9] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, L. Yang, Physics-informed machine learning, Nature Reviews Physics 3 (6) (2021) 422–440. [10] S. Wang, Y. Teng, P. Perdikaris, Understanding and mitigating gradient flow pathologies in physics-informed neural networks, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 43 (5) (2021) A3055–A3081. [11] A. Krishnapriyan, A. Gholami, S. Zhe, R. Kirby, M. Mahoney, Char-acterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021) 26548– 26560. [12] S. Wang, X. Yu, P. Perdikaris, When and why PINNs fail to train: a neural tangent kernel perspective, Journal of Computational Physics 449 (2022) 110768. [13] P. Niu, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, M. Feng, Y. Shi, Improved physics-informed neural network in mitigating gradient-related failures, Neuro-computing 638 (2025) 130167. [14] Z. Xiang, W. Peng, X. Liu, W. Yao, Self-adaptive loss balanced physics-informed neural networks, Neurocomputing 496 (2022) 11–34. 84 [15] C. Wu, M. Zhu, Q. Tan, Y. Kartha, L. Lu, A comprehensive study of non-adaptive and residual-based adaptive sampling for physics-informed neural networks, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-neering 403 (2023) 115671. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2022.115671 .[16] A. D. Jagtap, K. Kawaguchi, G. E. Karniadakis, Adaptive activation functions accelerate convergence in deep and physics-informed neural networks, Journal of Computational Physics 404 (2020) 109136. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2019.109136 .[17] A. D. Jagtap, G. E. Karniadakis, Extended physics-informed neural networks (XPINNs): a generalized space-time domain decomposition based deep learning framework for nonlinear partial differential equa-tions, Communications in Computational Physics 28 (5) (2020) 2002– 2041. doi:10.4208/cicp.OA-2020-0164 .[18] M. Schmidt, H. Lipson, Distilling free-form natural laws from experi-mental data, Science 324 (5923) (2009) 81–85. [19] M. Cranmer, Interpretable machine learning for science with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl, arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01582 (2023). [20] W. La Cava, P. Orzechowski, B. Burlacu, F. O. de França, M. Virgolin, Y. Jin, M. Kommenda, J. H. Moore, Contemporary symbolic regres-sion methods and their relative performance, Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks 1 (2021). [21] S.-M. Udrescu, M. Tegmark, AI Feynman: a physics-inspired method for symbolic regression, Science Advances 6 (16) (2020) eaay2631. [22] B. K. Petersen, M. Landajuela, T. N. Mundhenk, C. P. Santiago, S. K. Kim, J. T. Kim, Deep symbolic regression: recovering mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients, arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04871 (2019). [23] R. Majumdar, V. Jadhav, A. Deodhar, S. Karande, L. Vig, V. Runk-ana, Symbolic regression for PDEs using pruned differentiable programs, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07009 (2023). 85 [24] E. S. Tan, A. Soubki, M. Cranmer, SymTorch: symbolic distillation of neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21307 (2026). [25] S. Changdar, B. Bhaumik, N. Sadhukhan, S. Pandey, S. Mukhopadhyay, S. De, S. Bakalis, Integrating symbolic regression with physics-informed neural networks for simulating nonlinear wave dynamics in arterial blood flow, Physics of Fluids 36 (12) (2024) 121924. doi:10.1063/5.0247888 .[26] J. Das, B. Bhaumik, S. De, S. Changdar, Physics-informed neural net-work with symbolic regression for deriving analytical approximate solu-tions to nonlinear partial differential equations, Neural Computing and Applications 37 (24) (2025) 20205–20240. [27] S. Changdar, J. Das, B. Bhaumik, S. De, A refined physics-informed neu-ral network framework for solving nonlinear partial differential equations and extracting analytical expressions via symbolic regression, Comput-ers & Mathematics with Applications 213 (2026) 81–116. [28] R. Majumdar, V. Jadhav, A. Deodhar, S. Karande, L. Vig, V. Runkana, Physics-informed symbolic networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.06240 (2022). [29] Y. Gong, S. Lan, C. Yang, K. Xu, M. Jiang, StruSR: structure-aware symbolic regression with physics-informed Taylor guidance, arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.06635 (2025). [30] Y. Gong, C. Liu, S. Lan, J. Liao, C. Yang, J. Lin, M. Jiang, G. G. Yen, Symbolic regression with physics-informed residual and structural sensitivity pruning, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation (2026). [31] S. Garmaev, V. Sharma, O. Fink, A data-free symbolic regression ap-proach for solving equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07152 (2026). [32] H. Oh, R. Amici, G. Bomarito, S. Zhe, R. Kirby, J. Hochhalter, Ge-netic programming based symbolic regression for analytical solutions to differential equations, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03175 (2023). [33] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, J. N. Kutz, Discovering governing equa-tions from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems, 86 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (15) (2016) 3932– 3937. [34] S. H. Rudy, S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, J. N. Kutz, Data-driven dis-covery of partial differential equations, Science Advances 3 (4) (2017) e1602614. [35] G.-J. Both, S. Choudhury, P. Sens, R. Kusters, DeepMoD: deep learning for model discovery in noisy data, Journal of Computational Physics 428 (2021) 109985. [36] N. Makke, S. Chawla, Interpretable scientific discovery with symbolic regression: a review, Artificial Intelligence Review 57 (1) (2024) 2. [37] L. Lu, X. Meng, Z. Mao, G. E. Karniadakis, DeepXDE: a deep learning library for solving differential equations, SIAM Review 63 (1) (2021) 208–228. [38] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau, E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, et al., SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python, Nature Methods 17 (3) (2020) 261–272. [39] J. Nocedal, S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization, 2nd Edition, Springer, New York, NY, 2006. 87