Title: MECA: A Mechanism-Centered Agent for Constructing Well-Specified and Valuable Mathematical Conjectures

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.27709v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:31:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 78

Markdown Content:
# MECA: A Mechanism-Centered Agent for Constructing Well-Specified and Valuable Mathematical Conjectures 

# Wentao Long 1, Yunfei Zhang 2, Chenyi Li 3, Zaiwen Wen 3∗

> 1

Fudan University 2Qingdao University 3Peking University 

Abstract 

Automatically constructing well-specified and valuable math-ematical conjectures remains a central challenge in AI-assisted mathematical discovery. Many existing open problems and conjectures are often too broad, underspecified, or difficult to connect to plausible proof or refutation strategies. We view a mathematical mechanism as a structure or reason-ing principle that connects the assumptions of a candidate problem to its target conclusion, such as an inequality, invari-ant, decomposition, or reduction to an intermediate claim. We present MECA ( ME chanism-centered Conjecture Agent), a multi-agent framework that constructs conjectures by jointly developing candidate statements and their supporting mech-anisms. Explorer agents propose mechanisms, test how they apply, and revise the candidate conjecture accordingly, while critic agents assess their mathematical validity and research value. Their feedback guides changes to the assumptions, scope, and conclusion. Through this process, MECA trans-forms broad research directions into precise conjectures with substantive mathematical support while retaining a clearly identified unresolved core. We evaluate MECA in two com-plementary settings. First, we compare it with a generate-and-revise baseline on reconstructing preselected target-paper conclusions from target-conditioned but article-blind source materials. Second, we construct 100 semi-open problems from literature-derived seeds and existing open problems and eval-uate them through independent proof and refutation attempts by automated provers. Our results indicate that mechanism-centered refinement produces well-specified and research-worthy conjectures that remain challenging for current au-tomated provers. 

# 1 Introduction 

Recent work in AI for mathematics has largely focused on solving or formalizing targets supplied by humans, bench-marks, or existing mathematical texts. Large language mod-els solve competition and quantitative reasoning problems (Hendrycks et al. 2021; Lewkowycz et al. 2022). Neural and LLM-based theorem provers construct machine-checkable proofs through tactic generation, premise selection, and proof search (Polu and Sutskever 2020; Han et al. 2022; Lample et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2022, 2023; Yang et al. 2023; Xin et al. 2024; Li et al. 2026). Autoformalization systems trans-late informal mathematical statements and larger bodies of 

> ∗

Corresponding author: wenzw@pku.edu.cn .

mathematical text into proof-assistant languages (Wu et al. 2022; Azerbayev et al. 2023; Ying et al. 2024; Poiroux et al. 2024; Li et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2026). Some formalization tasks also require an implicit conjecturing step (Sivakumar et al. 2025). Nevertheless, the intended mathematical targets are typically determined by the input in advance. Automated conjecturing has been studied through heuris-tic search, testing, and numerical experimentation. Early sys-tems invented concepts and proposed conjectures (Lenat 1976; Colton 2002). Later methods generated equations, auxiliary lemmas, inequalities, numerical identities, or sym-bolic expressions from examples and observations (Claessen, Smallbone, and Hughes 2010; Johansson et al. 2014; Davila 2024; Raayoni et al. 2021; Udrescu and Tegmark 2020). Re-cent LLM-based systems generate formal conjectures and lemmas for prover training or library development (Dong and Ma 2025; Onda et al. 2025; Alhessi et al. 2025; Liu et al. 2026). Other systems formulate discovery as search under an automatic evaluator (Fawzi et al. 2022; Romera-Paredes et al. 2024; Trinh et al. 2024; Novikov et al. 2025; Georgiev et al. 2025). These approaches typically search over a predefined class of mathematical objects, such as equations, symbolic expressions, programs, or formal lemmas, under a fixed the-ory context or evaluation objective. Scientific ideation systems generate research proposals from literature or connect idea generation with experi-mentation (Baek et al. 2025; Lu et al. 2024; Si, Yang, and Hashimoto 2025). Recent mathematical systems pre-dict theorem-like claims, generate research problems, and as-sess creativity or interestingness (Busbib and Werman 2026; Chen and Jiang 2026a,b; Chen et al. 2025; Mishra et al. 2025). Mathematical research agents also address supplied open problems through decomposition, retrieval, criticism, and verification (An et al. 2026; Feng et al. 2026; Cao et al. 2026; Schmitt et al. 2026). However, these systems generally either operate within predefined search spaces or begin from an already selected research target. A general method is still needed to construct bounded conjectures from broad mathe-matical sources, jointly refine them with supporting mecha-nisms, exclude candidates already resolved during construc-tion, and retain a precise unresolved core. The remaining challenge is to construct research-worthy conjectures from broad and partially specified mathemati-cal sources. Such conjectures must be precise, supported by arXiv:2607.27709v1 [cs.AI] 30 Jul 2026 plausible proof or refutation routes, and valuable under either outcome, while retaining a genuine unresolved core. This re-quires the candidate statement and its supporting reasoning to be refined jointly: fixing the statement too early may pre-serve an ill-posed target, whereas adapting it too freely to available arguments may make it trivial or already resolved. We organize this refinement around mathematical mech-anisms . A mechanism is a reusable mode of reasoning, typ-ically grounded in the structural properties of the problem, that links a set of assumptions to a corresponding conclu-sion. Although such a mechanism may initially arise in the analysis of a particular theorem, it can often be extended to related objects, alternative assumptions. We characterize each mechanism in terms of the conditions required for its va-lidity, the portion of the candidate statement that it supports, and the circumstances under which it fails. This characteri-zation clarifies the progress already established, isolates the unresolved obstruction, and may further indicate whether the remaining difficulty calls for an additional argument or a revi-sion of the statement itself. Accordingly, the identification of a valid mechanism may constitute substantive mathematical progress even when it does not lead to a complete resolution of the conjecture. Motivated by this view, we introduce MECA (ME chanism-centered Conjecture Agent), a multi-agent framework that treats candidate statements and mechanisms as coupled search objects. Explorer agents retrieve, transfer, and adapt proof and refutation mechanisms, while critic agents audit whether their assumptions, conclusions, and claimed appli-cability are valid. Candidates lacking meaningful support are revised or rejected, and candidates already resolved by their mechanisms are excluded. Each accepted conjecture is paired with a mechanism bundle recording the supported steps and the explicit unresolved obligation, yielding a bounded prob-lem suitable for independent proof or refutation. We evaluate MECA in two settings. First, we compare it with a generate-and-revise baseline on recovering paper-level conclusions from target-conditioned but article-blind source materials. Second, we construct 100 semi-open problems from literature-derived seeds and existing open problems. We evaluate their quality and difficulty through blinded as-sessment and independent proof and refutation attempts. We further compare prover performance with and without the mechanism bundle. Our main contributions are as follows: 

• We formulate conjecture construction as the joint refine-ment of a candidate statement and its supporting mech-anisms, guided by audited partial support and explicit unresolved obstacles. 

• We introduce MECA , a mechanism-centered multi-agent framework for constructing precise conjectures from mathematical literature and broad open problems. 

• We contribute 100 prover-facing open problems with ex-plicit assumptions and mathematical motivation, expos-ing limitations of automated proof and refutation systems. 

# 2 Mechanism-Centered Conjecture Construction 

We formulate conjecture construction as the joint refinement of a candidate statement and its supporting mathematical mechanisms. Rather than generating an isolated statement and later attaching a proof sketch, the candidate’s assump-tions, scope, and conclusion are shaped by audited mathe-matical progress with obstacles that remain unresolved. At iteration t, the construction state is 

Ct = ( A, p t, G t),

where A fixes the admissible research boundary, pt is the current candidate statement, and Gt is its audited mechanism graph. The anchor remains fixed, while the candidate and graph are refined jointly, pt ←→ Gt.A reviewed research direction determines a target anchor 

A = ( o, PA, BA, FA), where o is the central mathematical object, PA contains the admissible assumptions, BA fixes the source and research boundary, and FA excludes sim-plifications that would remove the intended difficulty. The candidate pt must satisfy Asm( pt) ⊆ P A. It may be strength-ened, weakened, localized, or split, but it may not change the central object, introduce assumptions outside the anchor, or collapse the task into a forbidden easier problem. 

2.1 Mechanisms 

A mechanism is a mathematical argument or structural prin-ciple that establishes a concrete step toward proving or re-futing the current candidate. Examples include inequalities, invariants, localization arguments, decompositions, stability principles, extremal constructions, and reductions to inter-mediate claims. We represent a mechanism m by 

m =  Req( m), Prov( m), Gap( m),

where Req( m) contains the assumptions or previously es-tablished facts required by the argument. Prov( m) contains the consequences established by it, and Gap( m) records the nonroutine conditions or downstream obligations that remain unresolved in the current mechanism graph. Thus, a condi-tion may appear in Req( m) because the argument uses it and in Gap( m) when it has not yet been derived from the anchor assumptions or an upstream mechanism. A mechanism is therefore more than the name of a proof technique. It must contain an independently review-able derivation, construction, or counterexample argument. It is retained as an audited conditional step only when its claimed consequences follow under the stated requirements and its use for the current candidate is valid and non-circular. Any requirement not yet available in the current graph must remain explicit in its gap and be supplied by an upstream mechanism before composition. 

Example. Consider two Bregman proximal updates gener-ated by kernels h and eh, with 

x+ 

> h

= arg min 

> y



⟨g, y − x⟩ + r(y) + 1

η Dh(y, x )



,Figure 1: Overview of MECA .and x+ 

> eh

defined analogously. The goal is to show that if the two kernels have similar local curvature, then the correspond-ing proximal updates are also close. More precisely, suppose that r is convex and that, for every z ∈ R ,

∇2h(z) ⪰ μI, 

∥∇ 2h(z) − ∇ 2eh(z)∥ ≤ ε. 

We would like to derive a bound on ∥x+ 

> h

− x+ 

> eh

∥.The relevant mechanism is a comparison of the opti-mality conditions for the two proximal subproblems. Let 

d = x+ 

> h

− x+ 

> eh

. Subtracting the two optimality conditions, using the monotonicity of ∂r , and applying the curvature assumptions gives 

μ∥d∥2 ≤ ε∥x+ 

> eh

− x∥∥ d∥,

provided that x, x + 

> h

, x + 

> eh

∈ R . Consequently, 

∥x+ 

> h

− x+ 

> eh

∥ ≤ εμ ∥x+ 

> eh

− x∥.

This comparison argument is the mechanism mcmp . Its role is to turn two local properties of the kernels—strong curvature of h and closeness between the Hessians of h

and eh—into a quantitative stability bound for their proximal updates. Its audited requirements and consequence are 

Req( mcmp ) = 



r is convex ,

∇2h(z) ⪰ μI for z ∈ R ,

∥∇ 2h(z) − ∇ 2eh(z)∥ ≤ ε for z ∈ R ,x, x + 

> h

, x + 

> eh

∈ R 



and 

Prov( mcmp ) = 



∥x+ 

> h

− x+ 

> eh

∥ ≤ εμ ∥x+ 

> eh

− x∥



.

The argument also reveals exactly what remains to be proved. The curvature assumptions are available only inside 

R, so the comparison is valid only after establishing that both updated points remain in this region. This unresolved localization step is recorded as 

Gap( mcmp ) = 

n

x+ 

> h

, x + 

> eh

∈ R 

o

.

Thus, a mechanism is not merely the vague suggestion to “compare the two updates.” It is a concrete conditional argu-ment that identifies the assumptions it uses, the mathematical conclusion it establishes, and the additional fact that must still be proved before the argument can be applied. 

2.2 Mechanism Graphs 

Accepted mechanisms are organized into a directed graph 

Gt = ( Vt, E t), where an edge mi −→ mj means that a con-clusion of mi supplies a condition required by mj , namely 

Prov( mi) ∩ Req( mj )̸ = ∅.In the Bregman proximal-update example above, the com-parison mechanism mcmp requires x+ 

> h

, x + 

> eh

∈ R . A local-ization mechanism mloc may establish this condition, for example from a sufficiently small step size and a bound on the update magnitude, so that Prov( mloc ) ⊇ { x+ 

> h

, x + 

> eh

∈ R} .This produces the dependency mloc −→ mcmp . The local-ization mechanism first keeps both updates inside the region where the curvature assumptions hold, after which the com-parison mechanism derives the stability bound. Additional mechanisms may establish the required step-length bound, extend the valid region, or construct a counterexample out-side it. The graph may contain chains of arguments, merges of several supporting mechanisms, and parallel proof or refu-tation branches. It therefore records how mathematical ar-guments compose, rather than collecting an unordered set of proof ideas. Retained mechanisms must be valid, appli-cable, mutually compatible, and non-circular. Restating the target, assuming its central difficulty, or delegating a step to an unspecified argument does not constitute valid support. The candidate and graph are refined jointly: the candidate determines which mechanisms are relevant, while the graph may reveal missing assumptions, an overly strong conclusion, or a useful decomposition. Substantial revisions therefore require the retained mechanisms to be rechecked. Figure 2 illustrates how mechanisms compose through requirement– consequence interfaces to construct partial support for the problem while leaving the unresolved gaps explicit. 

Figure 2: Mechanism illustration. Through joint refinement, the candidate and mechanism graph form a mutually consistent proof problem. Its assump-tions must support concrete mechanisms, and the scope of its conclusion must remain consistent with what those mech-anisms establish. The graph thereby explains both the math-ematical support for the statement and the specific obstacle that remains unresolved, without certifying that the statement is true or genuinely open. 

# 3 The MECA Framework 

Figure 1 summarizes how MECA operationalizes the mechanism-centered formulation in Section 2. The formu-lation defines the mathematical objects and validity condi-tions, whereas the framework specifies how source-grounded candidates are constructed, reviewed, refined, and filtered. The pipeline consists of three stages: source-grounded seed construction, mechanism–problem co-exploration, and prover-facing problem construction. It retains candidates with audited nontrivial support and explicit unresolved cores, while rejecting unsupported speculation and removing pos-sible resolutions from the open-problem path. Supplemen-tary Sections A–C give the implementation-level action sets, record schemas, receipt semantics, and stopping rules. 

3.1 Source-grounded seed construction 

MECA begins with either structured mathematical literature or a manually curated broad open problem. In the literature-driven route, retrieved records provide definitions, estab-lished results, limitations, and source locators. In the open-problem route, the supplied description provides the initial direction, and supporting literature clarifies known regimes and barriers. 

The seed generator converts these materials into a seed recording the closest known result, a proposed source-relative advance, a preliminary prove-or-refute target, plausi-ble counterexample regimes, and an anticipated mathemati-cal bottleneck. Claims inherited from the sources retain their locators, whereas new claims are marked as hypotheses. 

The seed validator reviews each seed for research value and mathematical validity. The research-value review re-jects restatements, direct corollaries, and superficial param-eter variations, while the mathematical review checks defini-tions, assumptions, quantifiers, boundary cases, and simple degenerate examples. A local defect may be returned for bounded repair without changing the intended research di-rection. Invalid, resolved, or insufficiently meaningful seeds are rejected. Only validated seeds enter mechanism–problem co-exploration. Supplementary Section A specifies the seed schema, repair contracts, and replacement rules. Before Stage 2, reviewed source records are consolidated into a frozen source pack, and the research boundary is en-coded in the target anchor. Later agents may use these records and computational tools but cannot enlarge the source or as-sumption boundary. 

3.2 Mechanism–problem co-exploration 

For each validated seed, MECA instantiates and freezes the target anchor A defined in Section 2. The anchor fixes the re-search object, admissible assumptions, source boundary, and forbidden trivializations. Candidate revisions may change the local statement, but they must remain semantically consistent with this anchor. 

Candidate initialization and revision. The Mechanism– problem explorer initializes the candidate p and jointly re-fines it with the mechanism graph. At each iteration, it may propose a proof or refutation mechanism, revise or split the statement in response to audited evidence, or flag a possi-ble resolution. The candidate critic independently reviews each candidate version for well-posedness, consistency with the anchor, nontriviality, and alignment among its assump-tions, proof and refutation targets, and current mathematical support. Its feedback returns to the explorer for revision or splitting, while the validity of individual mechanisms is as-sessed separately by the mechanism critic. Every revision must remain within the frozen anchor A, and mechanisms accepted for an earlier version are rechecked after a substan-tive change. The complete action set and revision rules are given in Supplementary Section B. 

Mechanism exploration. The explorer searches forward from the assumptions, backward from the target, or between accepted mechanisms for an argument establishing part of the proof or refutation route. Each proposal states its require-ments, consequences, applicability conditions, and first un-resolved nonroutine step. Explicit failed attempts may guide later exploration, but they are not treated as evidence that an entire class of arguments must fail. 

Mechanism audit. The mechanism critic independently checks the central derivation, the claimed requirement-consequence interface, compatibility with the anchor and current candidate, boundary cases, and freedom from cir-cular reasoning. Accepted mechanisms enter the graph, re-pairable proposals are returned for revision, and invalid ones are excluded. Candidate defects or complete proofs and coun-terexamples are escalated to the corresponding revision or resolution path. These audit decisions authorize composi-tion but do not constitute formal proof certificates. Their exact contracts are given in Supplementary Section B. 

Compositional diagnosis. Individually accepted mecha-nisms may still fail to form a coherent route toward the candidate. The coverage judge therefore evaluates declared composition steps in a selected mechanism subgraph G′ ⊆ G

and a declared dependency order 

π = ( π1, . . . , π k).

Let A0 denote the capabilities supplied by the candidate assumptions. A mechanism may be applied only when 

Req( mπi ) ⊆ A i−1,

after which 

Ai = Ai−1 ∪ Prov( mπi ).

This test determines whether the declared interfaces com-pose. It does not independently recertify the underlying math-ematical arguments. Accepted mechanisms need not merge into a single ter-minal node. Independent mechanisms may support differ-ent assumptions, intermediate reductions, positive targets, or refutation targets. The relevant question is whether their declared interfaces are jointly compatible and whether they establish a genuine part of the route toward the candidate. 

Coverage decisions and routing. We distinguish three mathematical support decisions: 

• InsufficientSupport : the accepted mechanisms do not yet establish a meaningful nonroutine part of the proof or refutation route. 

• SubstantivePartial : the accepted mechanisms com-pose and establish a genuine nonroutine part of the route, while one to three precise unresolved cores remain. 

• FullCoverage : the accepted mechanisms appear to cover the complete positive or refutation target. 

InsufficientSupport returns the candidate to exploration with the missing capability identified. SubstantivePartial 

passes a candidate with meaningful support and explicit un-resolved cores to the Final Challenger. FullCoverage is isolated for independent verification rather than presented as an unresolved conjecture. Detailed routing and stopping rules are given in Supplementary Section B. Algorithm 1 summarizes this co-exploration process. 

Algorithm 1 Mechanism–Problem Co-Exploration 

Require: Validated seed s, frozen anchor A, source pack 

DA

Ensure: Accepted pair (p, G ), Split , Reject , or Quaran-tine  

> 1:

p ← InitializeCandidate (s, A ), G ← ∅ 

> 2:

while BudgetAvailable () do  

> 3:

(ρ, u ) ← CoverageJudge (p, G, A ) 

> 4:

if ρ = SubstantivePartial then  

> 5:

(δ, v ) ← FinalChallenge (s, A, p, D A) 

> 6:

if δ = Accept then  

> 7:

return (p, G ) 

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

(p, G, ω ) ← ApplyRoute (δ, v, p, G, A ) 

> 10:

else if ρ = InsufficientSupport then  

> 11:

α ← SelectNextAction (p, G, u ) 

> 12:

if α = Explore then  

> 13:

(κ, w ) ← ExploreCritique (p, u, A, G, D A) 

> 14:

(p, G, ω ) ← ApplyRoute (κ, w, p, G, A ) 

> 15:

else  

> 16:

(p, G, ω ) ← ApplyRoute (α, u, p, G, A ) 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

else  

> 19:

(p, G, ω ) ← ApplyRoute (ρ, u, p, G, A ) 

> 20:

end if  

> 21:

if ω̸ = Continue then  

> 22:

return ω 

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

end while  

> 25:

return Reject 

Final challenge. To reduce confirmation bias, the Final Challenger receives the candidate, anchor, seed, and source pack but not the mechanism graph or exploration history. It checks completeness, consistency, source-relative value, and nontriviality; attempts a direct proof or counterexample; and tests a concrete or boundary case. Passing candidates proceed to prover-facing construction; defects return for re-vision or rejection, and credible resolutions are quarantined for verification. Passing the challenge does not certify truth or historical openness. The exact audit contract is given in Supplementary Section C. 

3.3 Prover-facing problem construction 

An accepted candidate and selected mechanism subgraph are deterministically projected into a self-contained problem 

q = Θ( A, p, G ′).

The projection preserves the accepted assumptions, quan-tifiers, scope, positive target, and refutation target, while turning each unresolved core into a concrete proof obliga-tion. It may normalize notation or presentation, but cannot add assumptions, weaken the target, or change the accepted mathematical content. The statement is evaluated without its mechanism bundle. A proof probe attempts the positive target or a checkable first nonroutine step, while a refutation probe searches for a counterexample satisfying all assumptions. Neither receives the mechanism graph or exploration history. Complete so-lutions and valid counterexamples are sent to independent verification, whereas failure of either probe is recorded only as a difficulty signal and does not establish falsity, truth, or openness. The exact probe and hardening rules are given in Supplementary Section C. Only presentation-preserving normalization is allowed af-ter probing; any semantic change returns to Stage 2 for renewed review. Surviving statements are deduplicated by mathematical content rather than wording or mechanism route, then admitted under the domain quotas and retained with their mechanism bundles for downstream comparison. 

# 4 Experiments 

Since no established protocol directly evaluates the full end-to-end process of mathematical conjecture construction, we assess MECA in two complementary settings: target-conditioned, article-blind recovery of hidden mathematical conclusions, which provides a clear and objective reference point, and open-ended conjecture construction followed by independent downstream verification. 

4.1 Target-Conditioned Conclusion Recovery 

Setup. We select and freeze 20 post-2023 target papers, each reporting a substantive mathematical advance. For each target, we build an article-blind pack from seven pre-2024 pa-pers covering the relevant setting, prior results, proof mech-anisms, and known limitations. These papers are converted into anonymized source cards that preserve the mathemat-ical evidence while removing identifying information and target-revealing statements. A representative benchmark case is shown in Supplementary Section F.1. The target paper is used only to define the reconstruction task. During generation, neither system can access the target paper, its conclusions, or any post-2023 evidence. All out-puts are frozen before evaluation, so performance reflects re-construction from historically available evidence rather than retrieval or target-specific adaptation. We compare MECA with a Draft–Audit–Revise baseline that receives the same task and source pack. The baseline has no access to hidden targets, target-derived evaluation records, or external retrieval during generation. Both systems may return up to three theorem-level conjectures per case. For each case, the baseline performs five audit steps and five revision steps following its initial draft. 

Evaluation. For each system and target paper, an inde-pendent evaluator selects the generated conjecture with the strongest overall correspondence to the target result. All eval-uation dimensions are scored on this same conjecture, pre-venting evidence from being combined across different out-puts. The evaluator compares the selected conjecture with the target paper using a 100-point rubric. 

• Setting (20 points): alignment of the mathematical prob-lem, objects, and algorithms with the target result. 

• Assumptions (15 points): consistency of the hypotheses and parameter regimes with those in the target paper. 

• Conclusion (30 points): recovery of the central theorem-level claim. 

• Quantitative (20 points): accuracy of rates, complexity bounds, constants, and thresholds. 

• Boundary (15 points): coverage of sharpness, necessity, failure regimes, and relevant counterexamples. The component scores are summed for each case and aver-aged over the benchmark. 

Results. Table 1 reports the target-alignment scores. MECA improves the average score from 48.0 to 69.0 and outperforms the baseline on every dimension. The largest gains occur in Conclusion (+6.0) and Quantitative Accuracy (+5.5), indicating that mechanism-centered construction im-proves not only broad problem alignment but also recovery of the central claim and its precise strength. The gain in Bound-ary (+3.5) further suggests better recovery of sharpness and failure regimes. Because all five dimensions are scored on one selected conjecture, these gains cannot be obtained by combining a well-matched setting from one output with a strong conclu-sion from another. Conclusion and Quantitative Accuracy account for 11.5 of the 21.0-point improvement, while the simultaneous gains in Assumptions and Boundary indicate better recovery of the target’s validity regime rather than only its topic or theorem shape. Table 1: Target-alignment scores on the target-conditioned article-blind benchmark.                         

> Method Setting Assumptions Conclusion Quantitative Boundary Score
> MECA 18.0 11.5 21.0 12.5 6.0 69.0
> Baseline 15.5 8.0 15.0 7.0 2.5 48.0 Difference +2.5 +3.5 +6.0 +5.5 +3.5 +21.0

4.2 Conjecture Generation and Verification 

Setup. We evaluate 100 final conjectures constructed through the two routes described in Section 3. Route A contributes 92 conjectures constructed from literature col-lections retrieved from a private repository of mathematical papers, while Route B contributes 8 conjectures obtained by refining broad descriptions from a privately curated collec-tion of mathematical open problems. Both collections were assembled before this study and frozen before the experi-ments. The mathematical-domain distribution of the result-ing conjectures is shown in Figure 3. Each conjecture is submitted in an isolated run to QED, an open-source multi-agent system for research-level math-ematical proof generation (An et al. 2026), with a five-hour wall-clock limit. QED receives only the final conjecture state-ment, without access to MECA’s mechanisms, critic reports, or intermediate reasoning. This statement-only evaluation tests whether the conjectures are sufficiently precise, self-contained, and actionable to serve as standalone theorem-proving tasks. 

Evaluation. Prover success alone does not establish con-jecture quality: easy or nearly resolved statements may be Decentralized tracking 

> 12%
> Derivative-free optimization
> 10%
> Stochastic finite-sum
> 8%
> Performance estimation
> 5%
> Operator splitting
> 14%
> Bregman proximal
> 10%
> Error bounds
> 10%
> HJB safety
> 8%
> Exit risk
> 4%
> Low-rank recovery
> 5%
> Moment SDP
> 4%
> OMWU dynamics
> 6%
> Graph convex
> 4%
> Optimi-zation
> 35%
> Variational operators
> 34%
> Control stochastic
> 12%
> Algebraic inverse
> 9%
> Games
> 6%
> Disc. Conv.
> 4%

Conjecture domain 

> n = 100

Figure 3: Distribution of the 100 generated conjectures across mathematical domains. proved quickly, while other statements may lack necessary assumptions, contain ambiguities, or provide too little math-ematical foothold for proof or refutation to proceed. We therefore analyze both QED outcomes and the causes of unresolved cases. Each run is classified as proved , refuted , or unresolved ,depending on whether QED produces a verified proof, a ver-ified counterexample or contradiction, or neither within five hours. Proof and refutation are both treated as successful downstream adjudications because they demonstrate that the final statement supports an independently checkable mathe-matical conclusion. 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%     

> 35% 11% 54%
> Proved Refuted Unresolved

Figure 4: QED outcomes. For the 54 unresolved conjectures, we assign a single pri-mary failure cause: technical proof difficulty , missing as-sumptions , insufficient foothold , or ambiguous formulation .Missing assumptions indicate that an additional condition is needed to support the conclusion. Ambiguous formula-tion indicates that the objects, quantifiers, or scope are not uniquely specified. Insufficient foothold indicates that the statement is precise but does not expose a sufficiently con-crete route toward proof or refutation. Technical proof difficulty is assigned only when the state-ment is well posed, its assumptions are adequate, and a plau-sible proof or refutation route can be identified, but complet-ing the required estimate, construction, reduction, or case analysis exceeds QED’s search capability or time budget. This category therefore represents an unresolved mathemat-ical obstacle rather than a defect in the conjecture statement. 

Figure 5: Causes of the 54 unresolved QED outcomes. 

Results. Given only the final conjecture statements, QED proves 35 conjectures ( 35% ), refutes 11 ( 11% ), and leaves 54 ( 54% ) unresolved. Thus, 46% receive an independently verified positive or negative resolution. Among the unresolved cases, 44 ( 81 .5% ) are attributed to technical proof difficulty, while 6 involve missing assump-tions, 2 lack a sufficient mathematical foothold, and 2 con-tain ambiguous formulations. Consequently, only 10% of all generated conjectures exhibit an identifiable formulation or proof-readiness defect. The remaining 90% are either inde-pendently resolved or remain well-posed and mathematically actionable despite exceeding QED’s proof budget. These re-sults suggest that MECA produces conjectures that are usable as standalone theorem-proving tasks while retaining substan-tive mathematical difficulty. The 11 verified refutations are not construction failures: they show that the statements expose checkable negative branches and can support decisive counterexamples. Like-wise, the 44 technical-difficulty outcomes should not be con-flated with the 10 cases exhibiting formulation or proof-readiness defects: they retain a bounded mathematical core after the statement, assumption, and foothold checks pass. Supplementary Section F.3 illustrates this contrast: one case retains a specific global certificate as its unresolved core, whereas the other reaches a verified refutation after a local numerical error is repaired. 

# 5 Conclusion 

MECA frames conjecture construction as the coordinated development of a mathematical statement and the mecha-nisms that support or challenge it. Rather than generating a conjecture first and attaching a proof sketch afterward, the framework jointly refines the candidate, its assumptions, and its proof or refutation routes through mechanism exploration, independent criticism, and coverage diagnosis. This process turns broad research directions into prover-facing conjectures with explicit objects, assumptions, and unresolved cores. We evaluate MECA through article-blind conclusion recovery and isolated proof and refutation probes. References 

Alhessi, Y.; Einarsdóttir, S. H.; Granberry, G.; First, E.; Jo-hansson, M.; Lerner, S.; and Smallbone, N. 2025. Lem-manaid: Neuro-Symbolic Lemma Conjecturing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04942 .An, C.; Ye, Q.; Pan, M.; and Zhang, J. 2026. QED: An Open-Source Multi-Agent System for Generating Mathematical Proofs on Open Problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24021 .Azerbayev, Z.; Piotrowski, B.; Schoelkopf, H.; Ayers, E. W.; Radev, D.; and Avigad, J. 2023. ProofNet: Autoformaliz-ing and Formally Proving Undergraduate-Level Mathemat-ics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12433 .Baek, J.; Jauhar, S. K.; Cucerzan, S.; and Hwang, S. J. 2025. ResearchAgent: Iterative Research Idea Generation over Sci-entific Literature with Large Language Models. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , 6709–6738. Association for Computational Linguistics. Busbib, D.; and Werman, M. 2026. COMPOSE: Composing Future Theorems from Citations and Formal Structure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30333 .Cao, Y.; Qiu, R.; Liu, J.; Wang, J.; Guo, D.; Feng, R.; Zhi, L.; and Gao, X.-S. 2026. MechMath Agent Team: LLM Driven Agents for Mathematical Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.04394 .Chen, X.; Dai, X.; Du, Y.; Feng, Q.; Guo, N.; Gu, T.; Gao, Y.; Gao, Y.; Han, X.; Jiang, X.; Jin, Y.; Lin, H.; Lin, S.; Li, X.; Li, Y.; Li, Y.; Lai, Z.; Ma, Z.; Peng, Y.; Qian, J.; Sun, H.-Y.; Sun, J.; Wang, Z.; Wu, S.; Wang, Z.; Xu, B.; Xu, J.; Yu, Y.; Yang, Z.; Zha, H.; and Zhang, R. 2025. DeepMath-Creative: A Benchmark for Evaluating Mathematical Creativity of Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08744 .Chen, X.; and Jiang, X. 2026a. Can LLM Generate In-teresting Mathematical Research Problems? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18813 .Chen, X.; and Jiang, X. 2026b. Moonshine: An Autonomous Mathematical Research Agent Centered on Conjecture Gen-eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.10806 .Claessen, K.; Smallbone, N.; and Hughes, J. 2010. Quick-Spec: Guessing Formal Specifications Using Testing. In 

Tests and Proofs , volume 6143 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 6–21. Springer. Colton, S. 2002. Automated Theory Formation in Pure Math-ematics . London: Springer. Davila, R. 2024. TxGraffiti: A Software for Conjecturing in Mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19379 .Dong, K.; and Ma, T. 2025. STP: Self-Play LLM Theo-rem Provers with Iterative Conjecturing and Proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00212 .Fawzi, A.; Balog, M.; Huang, A.; Hubert, T.; Romera-Paredes, B.; Barekatain, M.; Novikov, A.; Ruiz, F. J. R.; Schrittwieser, J.; Swirszcz, G.; Silver, D.; Hassabis, D.; and Kohli, P. 2022. Discovering Faster Matrix Multiplication Al-gorithms with Reinforcement Learning. Nature , 610: 47–53. Feng, T.; Trinh, T. H.; Bingham, G.; Hwang, D.; Chervonyi, Y.; Jung, J.; Lee, J.; Pagano, C.; Kim, S.-h.; Pasqualotto, F.; Gukov, S.; Lee, J. N.; Kim, J.; Hou, K.; Ghiasi, G.; Tay, Y.; Li, Y.; Kuang, C.; Liu, Y.; Lin, H.; Liu, E. Z.; Nayakanti, N.; Yang, X.; Cheng, H.-t.; Hassabis, D.; Kavukcuoglu, K.; Le, Q. V.; and Luong, T. 2026. Towards Autonomous Mathe-matics Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10177 .Georgiev, B.; Gómez-Serrano, J.; Tao, T.; and Wagner, A. Z. 2025. Mathematical Exploration and Discovery at Scale. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02864 .Han, J. M.; Rute, J.; Wu, Y.; Ayers, E. W.; and Polu, S. 2022. Proof Artifact Co-Training for Theorem Proving with Language Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Hendrycks, D.; Burns, C.; Kadavath, S.; Arora, A.; Basart, S.; Tang, E.; Song, D.; and Steinhardt, J. 2021. Measuring Mathematical Problem Solving With the MATH Dataset. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 34, 15898–15909. Jiang, A. Q.; Li, W.; Tworkowski, S.; Czechowski, K.; Odrzygóźdź, T.; Miłoś, P.; Wu, Y.; and Jamnik, M. 2022. Thor: Wielding Hammers to Integrate Language Models and Automated Theorem Provers. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 35. Jiang, A. Q.; Welleck, S.; Zhou, J. P.; Li, W.; Liu, J.; Jam-nik, M.; Lacroix, T.; Wu, Y.; and Lample, G. 2023. Draft, Sketch, and Prove: Guiding Formal Theorem Provers with Informal Proofs. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Johansson, M.; Rosén, D.; Smallbone, N.; and Claessen, K. 2014. Hipster: Integrating Theory Exploration in a Proof As-sistant. In Intelligent Computer Mathematics , volume 8543 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , 108–122. Springer. Lample, G.; Lacroix, T.; Lachaux, M.-A.; Rodriguez, A.; Hayat, A.; Lavril, T.; Ebner, G.; and Martinet, X. 2022. HyperTree Proof Search for Neural Theorem Proving. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 35. Lenat, D. B. 1976. AM: An Artificial Intelligence Approach to Discovery in Mathematics as Heuristic Search . Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University. Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Memo AIM-286. Lewkowycz, A.; Andreassen, A.; Dohan, D.; Dyer, E.; Michalewski, H.; Ramasesh, V.; Slone, A.; Anil, C.; Schlag, I.; Gutman-Solo, T.; Wu, Y.; Neyshabur, B.; Gur-Ari, G.; and Misra, V. 2022. Solving Quantitative Reasoning Problems with Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, 3843–3857. Li, C.; Ma, W.; Wang, Z.; and Wen, Z. 2025. SITA: A Frame-work for Structure-to-Instance Theorem Autoformalization. arXiv:2511.10356. Li, C.; Nie, Y.; Ming, Z.; Zhang, G.; Yuan, K.; and Wen, Z. 2026. OptProver: Bridging Olympiad and Optimization through Continual Training in Formal Theorem Proving. arXiv:2604.23712. Liu, X.; Xie, Z.; Moeini, A.; Chen, C.; Liu, S. D.; Meng, Y.; Zhang, A.; and Zhang, S. 2026. MathlibLemma: Folklore Lemma Generation and Benchmark for Formal Mathematics. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02561 .Lu, C.; Lu, C.; Lange, R. T.; Foerster, J.; Clune, J.; and Ha, D. 2024. The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Auto-mated Open-Ended Scientific Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 .Mishra, S.; Machino, Y.; Poesia, G.; Jiang, A.; Hsu, J.; Weller, A.; Mishra, C.; Broman, D.; Tenenbaum, J. B.; Jamnik, M.; Zhang, C. E.; and Collins, K. M. 2025. AMatter of Interest: Understanding Interestingness of Math Problems in Humans and Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.08548 .Novikov, A.; V˜ u, N.; Eisenberger, M.; Dupont, E.; Huang, P.-S.; Wagner, A. Z.; Shirobokov, S.; Kozlovskii, B.; Ruiz, F. J. R.; Mehrabian, A.; Kumar, M. P.; See, A.; Chaudhuri, S.; Holland, G.; Davies, A.; Nowozin, S.; Kohli, P.; and Balog, M. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A Coding Agent for Scientific and Algorithmic Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 .Onda, N.; Kasaura, K.; Oriike, Y.; Taniguchi, M.; Sannai, A.; and Sonoda, S. 2025. LeanConjecturer: Automatic Gen-eration of Mathematical Conjectures for Theorem Proving. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22005 .Poiroux, A.; Weiss, G.; Kunčak, V.; and Bosselut, A. 2024. Improving Autoformalization Using Type Checking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07222 .Polu, S.; and Sutskever, I. 2020. Generative Language Modeling for Automated Theorem Proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393 .Raayoni, G.; Gottlieb, S.; Manor, Y.; Pisha, G.; Harris, Y.; Mendlovic, U.; Haviv, D.; Hadad, Y.; and Kaminer, I. 2021. Generating Conjectures on Fundamental Constants with the Ramanujan Machine. Nature , 590: 67–73. Romera-Paredes, B.; Barekatain, M.; Novikov, A.; Balog, M.; Kumar, M. P.; Dupont, E.; Ruiz, F. J. R.; Ellenberg, J.; Wang, P.; Fawzi, O.; Kohli, P.; and Fawzi, A. 2024. Mathemati-cal Discoveries from Program Search with Large Language Models. Nature , 625: 468–475. Schmitt, J.; Gehrunger, T.; Dekoninck, J.; Bérczi, G.; Kreit-ner, U.; Price, L.; and Holmes, D. 2026. ProofCouncil: An LLM Agent for Solving Open Mathematical Problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.09474 .Si, C.; Yang, D.; and Hashimoto, T. 2025. Can LLMs Gen-erate Novel Research Ideas? A Large-Scale Human Study with 100+ NLP Researchers. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Sivakumar, J. A.; Borchert, P.; Cardenas, R.; and Lampouras, G. 2025. Conjecturing: An Overlooked Step in Formal Math-ematical Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11986 .Trinh, T. H.; Wu, Y.; Le, Q. V.; He, H.; and Luong, T. 2024. Solving Olympiad Geometry without Human Demonstra-tions. Nature , 625: 476–482. Udrescu, S.-M.; and Tegmark, M. 2020. AI Feynman: A Physics-Inspired Method for Symbolic Regression. Science Advances , 6(16): eaay2631. Wang, Z.; Ma, W.; Ming, Z.; Zhang, G.; Yuan, K.; and Wen, Z. 2026. M2F: Automated Formalization of Mathematical Literature at Scale. arXiv:2602.17016. Wu, Y.; Jiang, A. Q.; Li, W.; Rabe, M. N.; Staats, C.; Jamnik, M.; and Szegedy, C. 2022. Autoformalization with Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , volume 35. Xin, H.; Guo, D.; Shao, Z.; Ren, Z.; Zhu, Q.; Liu, B.; Ruan, C.; Li, W.; and Liang, X. 2024. DeepSeek-Prover: Advancing Theorem Proving in LLMs through Large-Scale Synthetic Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14333 .Yang, K.; Swope, A. M.; Gu, A.; Chalamala, R.; Song, P.; Yu, S.; Godil, S.; Prenger, R.; and Anandkumar, A. 2023. Le-anDojo: Theorem Proving with Retrieval-Augmented Lan-guage Models. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 36. Ying, H.; Wu, Z.; Geng, Y.; Wang, J.; Lin, D.; and Chen, K. 2024. Lean Workbook: A Large-Scale Lean Problem Set Formalized from Natural Language Math Problems. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Datasets and Benchmarks Track .A Details of Step 1: Source-Grounded Seed Construction 

This section expands Step 1 of the pipeline. Its purpose is to construct a small portfolio of research directions from a fixed body of mathematical evidence. A Raw Seed is deliberately less specific than a theorem statement: it identifies a source-relative gap, the mathematical object to be controlled, the assumptions that may be used, and concrete ways in which the direction can fail. It does not prescribe the mechanism that should solve the gap. The phrase source grounded refers to this evidence dis-cipline. It does not impose a universal publication-year cut-off on conjecture generation. In a normal run, the evidence boundary may be a user-supplied library, a retrieval snap-shot, or a curated open-problem dossier. Once materialized, that boundary is frozen so that the closest-result comparison and later revisions are reproducible. 

A.1 Input Routes and Frozen Evidence Boundary 

MECA supports two source routes. In the literature-driven route, the source pack contains structured paper cards, def-initions, established results, known limitations, and source locators selected for a research focus. In the open-problem route, the pack begins from a manually curated broad prob-lem and adds records describing known regimes, barriers, and partial results. Both routes are converted into the same versioned source-pack representation before seed generation begins. Each source card records its identity, mathematical setting, relevant definitions, established conclusions, known limitations, and the evidence supporting those fields. Thus, the routes differ in how evidence is collected, but later agents receive the same categories of information. The complete evidence snapshot, retrieval policy, prompt version, model configuration, and source-card contents are assigned immutable identifiers. Every generated seed and review decision records the identifiers of the inputs on which it depends. A resumed run is valid only when those identifiers still match, so newly retrieved material cannot silently alter an earlier decision. If retrieval reveals a closer result, the proposed gap may be narrowed or rejected, but the change creates a new evidence snapshot and generation record; it may not modify a frozen benchmark case or temporal cutoff in place. For each proposed direction, source subtraction is per-formed before novelty is claimed. If the closest established result proves conclusion X under assumptions A, the seed must identify a bounded delta ∆ beyond X: for example, a removed assumption, a changed geometric regime, a sharper complexity boundary, or a failure classification. Terminology changes, arbitrary extra parameters, and routine corollaries are not valid deltas. A formulation, unification, application bridge, diagnostic, or adaptivity claim is retained only if re-solving it changes a genuine mathematical boundary, rate, obstruction, complexity, or theorem class. 

A.2 Portfolio Planning 

Several independent generations from one broad focus of-ten produce cosmetic variants. We therefore construct the         

> Route Source-relative question Limitation-driven Can an explicit assumption or scope limitation be crossed? Bottleneck-gap-driven Can a missing comparison, obstruc-tion, or nonroutine step be isolated? Assumption-transfer-driven Does a conclusion transfer across changed geometry, regularity, noise, or operator assumptions? Complexity-gap-driven Can a rate, dimension, sample, or-acle, memory, or iteration gap be closed or shown sharp? Geometry-mismatch-driven What fails between local analytic conditions and global geometric structure? Failure-case-driven Can a boundary failure or counterex-ample family be characterized?

Table 2: Raw Seed route types. portfolio jointly before generating any individual seed. For a requested portfolio size m, the planner returns exactly the slots 1, . . . , m . Each slot specifies a source focus, route type, novelty axis, and explicit nonoverlap constraints relative to the other slots. It deliberately omits a theorem statement and proof mechanism, leaving those choices to later stages. The plan is accepted only when every slot is present, uniquely numbered, tied to the frozen evidence snapshot, and mathematically distinguishable from the others. Each Seed Scout receives one accepted brief and must remain within its source focus and novelty axis even if another direction appears easier. If a seed is rejected, its replacement must address the same brief rather than migrating to a different slot. The article-blind configuration uses m = 3 ; this is an experimental diversity budget rather than a restriction of the general method.        

> Planner field Meaning
> slot Exact index in 1, . . . , m .
> source_focus Source result, limitation, or object from which the direction must originate.
> route_type One of the six source-relative routes in Ta-ble 2.
> novelty_axis The intended boundary change after sub-tracting known results.
> nonoverlap Other slots whose objects, gaps, or contri-bution types must not be duplicated.

A.3 Raw Seed Record 

The Seed Scout returns one JSON object. The record must be sufficiently concrete for independent attack while leaving mechanism discovery to Step 2. Its mathematical surface is summarized in Table 3. Every authorized premise is stored as an {id, statement} record. An empty premise list is legal only for a genuinely unconditional direction. The desired conclusion, a certificate, or the output of a hoped-for mechanism may not be inserted as an assumption. Likewise, the Seed Scout may name a bottleneck and falsification tests, but it may not include a mechanism_handle , a bridge-lemma recipe, or Field Required content     

> raw_conjecture A preliminary research direction rather than a final quantified theorem or proof plan.
> source_boundary Closest results, the minimal delta after subtraction, why the delta remains unresolved, and explicit overlap or source-coverage risks.
> claim_shape Central mathematical object, controlled quantity, assumption-to-conclusion direction, and the complete list of authorized premises.
> attack_surface Decisive bottleneck, a smallest informative toy case, and at least two concrete failure tests or counterexample knobs.

Table 3: Required mathematical content of a Raw Seed. a named proof mechanism. This separation prevents Step 1 from appearing successful merely because it assumed the principal object that Step 2 is intended to discover. Before review, each Raw Seed is converted into a canonical versioned record. This normalization may assign administra-tive identifiers and standardize list or field representations, but it may not add an assumption, claim, example, or other mathematical content. A deterministic precheck then requires a nonempty direction, a complete source boundary, unique premise identifiers, a decisive bottleneck, an informative toy case, and at least two failure tests. Passing this check estab-lishes only that the record is complete and well-formed; it does not establish correctness, novelty, or value. The exact revision identifier is fixed before model-based review, and every review decision names the revision it evaluates. 

A.4 Independent Review, Repair, and Replacement 

The review stage uses two independent critics. The mathematical critic audits correctness and coun-terexample pressure, whereas the research critic au-dits source-relative novelty, value, and readiness for mechanism exploration. Each dimension returns one of survives_deep_attack , repair_needed ,

reject_needed , or audit_incomplete , together with the attack actually attempted, the first failed derivation or test, a minimal repair, confidence, and warnings to carry forward. The mathematical critic identifies the weakest implied claim and tries its first nontrivial derivation. It also instanti-ates an in-scope toy, endpoint, boundary, or limiting family, verifies the assumptions, and calculates the target observ-able. A deterministic substance check downgrades an ap-parent pass to audit_incomplete unless the response contains a specified instance, an assumption check, a target, and an explicit calculation. The research critic retrieves or identifies the closest re-sult inside the allowed evidence boundary, subtracts routine consequences, and asks whether a bounded nonroutine delta remains. It rejects direct coverage, superficial reparameter-ization, and low-value repackaging. Readiness passes only when a downstream Explorer can identify the object, quan-tity, implication, bottleneck, and falsification test without al-ready being handed a solution. When the mathematical critic finds a decisive rejection, the research call may be skipped; otherwise all four dimensions are retained so that one passing dimension cannot conceal a blocker in another. The review loop is as follows. 1. Freeze the current Raw Seed as a uniquely identified re-vision. 2. Run the mathematical and, when legal, research reviews. 3. Promote only if every completed dimension survives and no blocker remains. 4. If the defect is bounded, write one revision-bound repair contract containing all blocking findings and request a full replacement record under the same seed ID. 5. If the direction is false, source-covered, duplicate, or low value, record the negative lesson and request a new real-ization within the same portfolio slot. 6. Abandon the slot if its repair or replacement budget is ex-hausted; budget exhaustion never weakens the acceptance gate. A repair may narrow assumptions, sharpen the closest-result contrast, replace an inappropriate residual by a metric-native one, or make the toy test concrete. It may not broaden the novelty delta, migrate to another portfolio slot, introduce a mechanism, or turn the seed into a final theorem. The article-blind run permits four repair iterations and three replacement attempts per slot. A promoted seed is stored together with its exact revision identifier, source-snapshot identifier, and completed critic decisions. Changing any mathematical field creates a new revision and invalidates the target anchor and every downstream candidate, mechanism, coverage assess-ment, and challenge decision derived from the previous ver-sion. 

# B Details of Step 2: Mechanism–Problem Co-Exploration 

This section specifies the runtime state, legal transitions, audit contracts, and stopping rules used during mechanism– problem co-exploration. The design separates mutable can-didate content from the immutable research boundary and separates mechanism acceptance from candidate acceptance. Every transition is recorded against explicit artifact revisions so that a resumed run cannot silently reuse evidence produced for an earlier candidate. 

B.1 Immutable Target Anchor and Candidate State 

For each reviewed Raw Seed, the protocol instantiates an immutable target anchor A. The anchor records the mathe-matical object under study, the source boundary, admissible assumptions, required target direction, excluded trivializa-tions, and source-relative value criteria. Agents may refine the candidate statement within this boundary, but no transi-tion may mutate A. An apparent need to enlarge the source pack or assumption boundary therefore terminates the cur-rent route rather than changing the benchmark instance. The mutable Research Candidate is stored as a revisioned record p(r). Each revision contains: 

• a self-contained statement with explicit domains and quantifiers; 

• the current assumption set and scope restrictions; 

• a positive target and a corresponding refutation target; 

• one to three named unresolved mathematical cores; 

• validation checks, boundary cases, and the next proposed experiment; 

• provenance linking every semantic field to the seed and anchor; and 

• a content hash used to bind mechanisms and receipts to this revision. The mechanism state is a directed acyclic graph G. A node is an exact mechanism revision, and an edge declares that one mechanism consumes a capability supplied by an-other. Each node records its requirements, consequences, derivation, applicability conditions, support boundary, pos-itive test, obstruction test, first nonroutine step, unresolved bottleneck, and dependencies. Failed and rejected proposals may remain as search memory, but only independently pro-moted nodes with current acceptance receipts belong to the auditable graph used by the Coverage Judge. The construction state additionally records the action his-tory, Critic decisions, coverage decisions, probe outputs, and the exact revisions of all inputs needed to resume. Its iden-tifier binds the candidate, mechanisms, anchor, source snap-shot, prompt version, and effective configuration. A resumed run is valid only when these identifiers agree with the saved state. The Explorer is the only role permitted to propose a seman-tic candidate revision. The Mechanism Critic may request such a revision, and the Coverage Judge or Final Challenger may route the state back to the Explorer, but these roles do not directly edit the candidate. The Final Challenger described in Section C receives an isolated view without G, receipts, or the exploration trace. 

B.2 Explorer Transitions 

At each iteration the Explorer reads the complete current state and emits exactly one legal action. Actions are validated by the transition protocol rather than executed implicitly from free-form text. This prevents a response from both changing the candidate and claiming support from receipts tied to the previous revision. A mechanism proposal may reason forward from the as-sumptions, backward from a target, or by connecting ac-cepted intermediate capabilities. These are search strategies rather than distinct action types. Every proposal must state the first nonroutine mathematical step and identify what remains unresolved; a schema-complete restatement of the target is not a mechanism. A frontier revision must identify every semantic change relative to p(r), give a reason tied to an audit or experiment, and update both the positive and refutation targets. The tran-sition is invalid if it alters the immutable anchor, introduces an unsupported assumption, removes a known counterex-ample through artificial scope restriction, or eliminates the unresolved core without reporting a possible resolution. The split action creates exactly two children whose scopes or claims are independently meaningful and nonover-lapping. A split is not a device for returning multiple loosely related conjectures. Each child receives its own candidate identity and begins with no current mechanism receipts. 

B.3 Mechanism Proposal and Independent Audit 

The Mechanism Critic receives the exact mechanism revi-sion, current candidate, anchor, declared dependencies, and any coverage brief that motivated the proposal. It replays the central derivation and checks correctness, noncircular-ity, typed-interface honesty, applicability, provenance, and candidate relevance. At least one positive cell and one ob-struction or boundary cell must be examined concretely. The Critic returns one of the following routes: 

• promote : the mechanism is correct, closed, noncircu-lar, and contributes a concrete capability relevant to the candidate; 

• repair : a bounded local defect can be corrected without changing the candidate frontier; 

• reject : the mechanism is incorrect, circular, inappli-cable, redundant, or fails to provide its declared conse-quence; 

• revise_frontier : the audit exposes a candidate-level defect; 

• resolution_candidate : the audit yields a credible complete proof or counterexample requiring independent verification. Promotion creates an acceptance receipt containing the candidate revision hash, mechanism revision hash, depen-dency hashes, Critic decision, tested cells, and support boundary. The receipt permits the mechanism to participate in coverage composition. It is not a formal proof certificate, a novelty judgment, or evidence that the full candidate is true. 

B.4 Coverage Composition and Stopping Rule 

The Coverage Judge receives the exact candidate revision, immutable anchor, and all promoted mechanism revisions with current receipts. It selects a nonredundant subgraph 

G′ ⊆ G and a dependency order π = ( π1, . . . , π k). Starting from the capabilities supplied by the candidate assumptions, composition is valid only when 

A0 = Cap( p),

Req( mπi ) ⊆ A i−1, i = 1 , . . . , k, 

Ai = Ai−1 ∪ Prov( mπi ).

(1) Action State transition          

> propose_mechanism Create one mechanism revision and send it to independent audit.
> add_support Propose a nonredundant mechanism after insufficient coverage.
> request_refute Run the one-shot candidate-scoped refutation probe when permitted.
> revise_frontier Create a new semantic candidate revision and invalidate current receipts.
> harden Strengthen a permitted statement field after a recorded trigger.
> split Replace the route with exactly two nonoverlapping child candidates.
> emit Send a stable substantively supported candidate to the Final Challenger.
> reject Terminate an invalid, redundant, or insufficiently valuable route.
> resolution_candidate Quarantine a possible complete proof or counterexample for verification.

Table 4: Explorer actions and their state transitions. The Judge replays the declared interfaces in order and veri-fies that the composition supports the candidate rather than merely connecting notation. The Judge returns exactly one of seven decisions: insufficient_support ,

substantive_partial , full_coverage , split ,

revise_frontier , resolution_candidate , or 

reject . The first three describe mathematical support; the remaining four are direct control-flow routes. 

Insufficient_support names the missing ca-pability and gives a lightweight success condition without prescribing the key equation or mechanism. 

Substantive_partial requires a genuine nonroutine intermediate result while leaving one to three precise mathe-matical cores open. This is the intended co-exploration stop-ping state. Full_coverage is not emitted as an open con-jecture: it is quarantined for resolution checking, as is any credible complete proof or counterexample. Emission additionally requires a stable candidate revision, current receipts, a valid dependency order, completed posi-tive and obstruction checks, and no pending repair or refuta-tion result. The candidate is then passed to the isolated Final Challenger. Challenger repair returns to co-exploration; ac-ceptance advances to prover-facing construction. 

B.5 Receipt Invalidation and Checkpoint Semantics 

Receipts are candidate-version-bound. Any semantic change to assumptions, domains, quantifiers, scope, positive target, refutation target, or unresolved cores creates a new candidate revision and invalidates every current receipt. Formatting-only normalization may preserve the revision only when the normalized abstract statement and its content hash are un-changed. A repaired mechanism receives a new mechanism revision. Its previous receipt and all receipts that depend on it become stale. Removing a graph node likewise invalidates dependent compositions. This invalidation is applied transitively; an agent cannot declare a receipt from an earlier revision to be current. Each accepted transition is recorded before the next agent call. A resumable state is committed only after the candidate, graph, receipts, and transition history agree. On resume, all revision identifiers are verified; a state with a missing in-put, stale receipt, changed source snapshot, different effective configuration, or incomplete transition is rejected. These rules make retries idempotent. Repeating an agent call may produce a new proposal, but it cannot overwrite an accepted revision or attach evidence to a different candi-date. Terminal routes—rejection, split, possible resolution, and accepted emission—are recorded explicitly so that down-stream stages can distinguish mathematical outcomes from infrastructure failures. 

# C Details of Step 3: Prover-Facing Construction 

Step 3 separates candidate acceptance from mechanism ac-ceptance. It performs an isolated candidate-level challenge, projects the surviving mathematical content into a self-contained prove-or-refute task, and then tests only that state-ment for triviality and concrete refutation. 

C.1 Final Challenger 

The Final Challenger receives the exact Research Candidate, immutable target anchor, reviewed Raw Seed, and frozen source pack. It intentionally does not receive the mechanism graph, coverage composition, critic decisions, or acceptance receipts. This visibility restriction prevents a plausible proof route from substituting for a coherent and valuable statement. The Challenger performs four independent audits: 1. Statement audit: close definitions, domains, quantifiers, assumptions, and scope; verify that the positive and refutation targets are logical alternatives under identical premises. 2. Counterexample audit: calculate an in-scope toy, boundary, endpoint, degenerate, or scaling case and attack the candidate itself. Failure of one possible mechanism is not a counterexample. 3. Value audit: subtract the closest frozen-source result and state the value of proof, valid refutation, and meaningful partial progress. 4. Difficulty audit: identify the remaining nonroutine bot-tleneck and a finite progress certificate; reject routine tasks and unbounded research programs. The decisions are accept , bounded 

repair , exactly-two-way split , reject , or 

resolution_candidate . A repair returns to Step 2, where a semantic candidate change invalidates all receipts. Acceptance means only that the candidate passes this isolated audit; it does not certify truth or historical openness. 

C.2 Deterministic Projection 

An accepted pair consisting of anchor A, candidate p, and se-lected audited mechanisms G′ is deterministically projected to 

q = Θ( A, p, G ′). (2) The projector preserves assumptions, quantifiers, scope, pos-itive target, and refutation target. It closes notation, states all objects locally, converts each unresolved core into a checkable obligation, and separates the public problem statement from the optional mechanism bundle. It may not add an assumption, weaken a target, or silently re-place the accepted mathematical content. The result is a 

semi_open_problem record. For experiment-facing projection, the projection pro-cedure considers accepted paper-level outputs, semi-open tasks, resolution records, and research candidates in that or-der, normalizes them to a common identity-free surface, re-moves exact duplicates, and retains at most three documents. This broader benchmark projector measures whether a run produced a theorem-level proposal; it does not mean every projected record was admitted as a semi-open task. 

C.3 Statement-Only Probes and Final Filtering 

The final prover stress gate schedules one Blind Prover and one Refute Prover. Both see only the prover-facing statement. The Blind Prover attempts a solution or a checkable first non-routine step. A first complete solution triggers one hardening opportunity; a second complete solution routes the task to resolution quarantine. Failure to identify a first step is ac-ceptable evidence of difficulty and is not itself evidence of ambiguity. The Refute Prover must supply a concrete witness, verify every shared assumption, and calculate violation of the posi-tive predicate. An unverified objection is not a counterexam-ple. A valid counterexample is quarantined for independent verification. After the probes, notation-only normalization is permitted, but any semantic statement change must return to Step 2. Finally, the scheduler deduplicates globally using math-ematical objects, assumptions, scope, constraints, positive target, and refutation contract, rather than surface wording or mechanism route. It then applies any frozen domain quota. Rejected candidates and possible resolutions remain in ex-plicit artifact collections instead of being silently counted as open problems. 

# D Experimental Settings 

This section provides the implementation details omitted from the Experiments section of the main paper: model assignments, information boundaries, frozen-data construc-tion, per-case budgets, and stopping rules. Evaluation-only information is never returned to a generation system, and a run enters the reported summaries only after producing a complete case-level record. 

D.1 Models, Roles, and Information Boundaries 

All roles run in the same versioned execution environment with fixed role-specific instructions. Cases are independent. Within a case, records are passed only along the protocol-defined edges, so parallel scheduling changes throughput but not the information available to a role or the order of case-level decisions. 

D.2 Target-Conditioned Article-Blind Recovery 

Benchmark unit. Each case Di consists of three frozen objects: a broad mathematical case description di, an article-blind source pack Si = {si1, . . . , s i7}, and a target-result record Ti. The record Ti decomposes the central result of one later paper into the five evaluation fields used in the first experiment of the main paper: setting, assumptions, conclu-sion, quantitative regime, and boundary behavior. During generation, both systems receive only (di, Si). After their conjecture sets are frozen, the evaluator receives one frozen output set and Ti. The task is therefore theorem-level recon-struction from an earlier mathematical neighborhood, not prediction of a paper title, identifier, or free-form topic. 

Frozen target set. The recovery benchmark contains 20 cases, denoted D001–D020. Each case is anchored to one target paper first made public after December 31, 2023 and reporting a substantive theorem-level mathematical advance. The complete set of target papers is selected and frozen be-fore either system is run. Thus, “target-conditioned” means that the benchmark designer uses a fixed target to define the mathematical neighborhood and the later evaluation refer-ence; it does not mean that the target conclusion is exposed to the generation systems. 

Source-pack construction. For each target, seven papers available by December 31, 2023 are selected to cover the relevant setting, established results, proof mechanisms, and known limitations. This yields 140 source cards in total. Each card preserves four classes of mathematical evidence: the problem setting, conclusions already established, mecha-nisms supporting those conclusions, and limitations or failure regimes stated by the source. The cards remove titles, authors, venues, URLs, persistent identifiers, filenames, theorem numbers, and references that reveal the target paper. Target-paper text, target conclusions, and post-2023 evidence are not included. The cards are there-fore intended to preserve the mathematical premises needed for source-grounded reasoning while preventing direct article lookup or title completion. This protocol controls informa-tion supplied at inference time; it does not claim parametric unlearning of all post-2023 mathematics. 

Task presented to both systems. Both systems receive the same broad case description and the same seven source cards. They are asked to propose theorem-level advances supported by that evidence and may return at most three conjectures for the case. A valid output must state the mathematical objects, assumptions, quantified claim, relevant quantitative regime, and any important boundary or failure condition. Neither system may retrieve the target paper or use evaluator feedback during generation. Role group Model Effort Information and tools available          

> MECA and baseline genera-tion
> gpt-5.5 xhigh The same case description and seven anonymized pre-2024 source cards. Neither system receives the target paper, target-result de-composition, evaluation record, or unrestricted external retrieval. Target-alignment evaluator gpt-5.5 xhigh One frozen system output set and the preselected target-result record. Evaluation begins only after generation is complete and cannot trigger output revision. QED prover and verifiers gpt-5.6-sol xhigh Only the final self-contained prove-or-refute statement. MECA mechanisms, critic reports, source cards, and intermediate con-struction traces are withheld.

Table 5: Models, reasoning effort, and information boundaries used in the experiments. 

MECA protocol. MECA follows the source-grounded construction process detailed in Sections A, B, and C. It first forms research seeds from gaps and tensions in the source cards, then co-refines candidate statements and candidate proof or refutation mechanisms, and finally converts sur-viving candidates into self-contained theorem-level outputs. Mechanisms are treated as partial mathematical support, not as extra assumptions or completed proofs. Independent crit-ics may reject, repair, split, or narrow a candidate before it is retained. The limits in Table 6 are nested ceilings. A case may ter-minate earlier when all directions are rejected, a candidate is already implied by the sources, a valid counterexample is found, or no candidate passes the review gates. Exhaust-ing a budget does not turn an incomplete candidate into an accepted output. 

Draft–Audit–Revise baseline. The baseline starts from an initial set of theorem-level drafts, performs five audit steps, and then performs five revision steps. Each audit checks the drafts against the supplied sources for mathematical co-herence, unsupported assumptions, overclaiming, and miss-ing quantitative or boundary conditions. Each revision may repair or replace a draft in response to the preceding au-dit. The baseline has the same three-output cap and the same information boundary as MECA , but it does not main-tain explicit candidate-mechanism co-evolution, mechanism-coverage records, or isolated proof and refutation probes. The comparison therefore holds the task, evidence, output cap, and target blindness fixed while varying the construc-tion procedure. 

Freeze and target-based evaluation. All outputs are frozen before the evaluator receives any target information. Evaluation then follows the same-candidate 100-point rubric in the first experiment of the main paper. Reversed impli-cations, target conclusions inserted as assumptions, incom-patible quantifiers, conflicting parameter regimes, and mis-matched rates are treated as substantive errors rather than repaired across outputs. Scores are computed per case and averaged over the 20 frozen targets. 

Interpretation. This experiment measures target align-ment under an article-blind input protocol. It does not test whether the generated conjecture is historically novel, and it does not use post-hoc retrieval to choose a favorable target. Because the target is fixed before generation, the reported score always refers to reconstruction of the same hidden re-sult for both systems. 

D.3 Open-Ended Conjecture Generation and Verification 

Conjecture sample. The second experiment uses 100 final conjectures constructed through the two routes in the Frame-work section of the main paper. Route A contributes 92 con-jectures from literature collections in a private repository of mathematical papers, and Route B contributes 8 conjec-tures obtained by refining broad descriptions from a privately curated collection of mathematical open problems. Both col-lections were assembled before the study and frozen before generation. Unlike the recovery benchmark, these tasks have no preselected hidden target paper and are not scored by similarity to a later result. 

Statement freeze and QED input. Once a conjecture passes MECA’s final construction checks, its prover-facing statement is frozen. Each statement is submitted to QED in a fresh isolated run with a five-hour wall-clock limit. QED receives definitions, assumptions, the positive conclusion, and the admissible refutation objective contained in the final statement, but no MECA mechanism, critic report, source card, or intermediate reasoning trace. 

Terminal outcomes. Terminal outcomes and unresolved-case diagnoses follow the verification criteria in Section E.3. Timeout or exhausted search is not treated as evidence that the conjecture is true, false, or ill posed. 

Relation between the two experiments. QED is not used to rescore the target-recovery outputs, and target alignment is not used to judge the 100 open-ended conjectures. Recovery evaluates whether the construction procedure approaches a fixed hidden conclusion; QED evaluation tests whether inde-pendently generated statements support a checkable proof-or-refutation attempt. Keeping these outcome spaces separate avoids treating similarity to an existing theorem as proof of conjecture quality or treating prover failure as evidence of poor target recovery. Item Limit Item Limit Raw Seed directions 3 Seed repairs/direction 4Seed replacements/direction 3 Joint search rounds 4Coverage assessments 4 Active candidates 2Splits/candidate 1 Candidate attempts/seed 3Mechanisms/candidate 3 Repairs/mechanism 3Critic steps 30 Stable confirmations 2Final statement repairs 2 Blind probes 1Refutation probes 1 Outputs/case 3

Table 6: Per-case MECA ceilings in target-conditioned recovery. These are stopping limits, not required numbers of calls. 

# E Evaluation Criteria 

E.1 Complete Target-Recovery Output 

A target-recovery case is complete when deterministic nor-malization finds at least one retained theorem-level conjec-ture. The frozen record exposes the formal setting, assump-tions, conclusion, quantitative regime, boundary conditions, source-relative motivation, and source-card identifiers. Com-pleteness is a structural criterion; it does not establish correct-ness or agreement with the hidden target. For frozen output sets Pi,

Rvalid = 120 

> 20

X

> i=1

⊮{P i̸ = ∅}. (3) 

E.2 Target Alignment and Evaluator Scoring 

The evaluator applies the rubric from the first experiment of the main paper to one selected conjecture per case. Reversed implications, assumed conclusions, incompatible quantifiers, conflicting regimes, and mismatched rates count as substan-tive mismatches rather than being repaired by combining different outputs. This same-candidate rule prevents topical agreement from obscuring errors in theorem direction, quan-titative strength, or validity regime. Three independent evaluator replicas each select and score a conjecture. The case-level selection is the majority choice, with total target-alignment score used only to break a three-way tie; component scores are averaged across the replicas. The critic-aligned conjecture-quality rubric is conjunctive: a weighted score cannot compensate for a fatal mathematical or source-value failure. 

E.3 QED Verification and Error Taxonomy 

QED adjudication requires both structural and detailed ver-ification. Proved requires a complete positive proof passing both layers, while Refuted requires an in-scope counterex-ample or negative argument passing the same standard. All other terminal outcomes are Unresolved .Each unresolved case receives one primary label: (i) tech-nical proof difficulty after statement and foothold checks pass; (ii) missing assumptions; (iii) insufficient mathemat-ical foothold; or (iv) ambiguous formulation. Engineering failures, if any, are recorded separately rather than treated as mathematical outcomes. 

# F Illustrative Examples 

This section first gives a schematic example of the target-conditioned recovery benchmark and then two technical case studies from the open-ended setting of Section D.3. The schematic example explains the information boundary and scoring unit but is not one of the 20 scored benchmark cases. The two open-ended cases respectively preserve an explicit unresolved core and reach a complete refutation after verifier-requested repair. We distinguish exact reductions, numerical reconnaissance, incomplete certificates, and terminally veri-fied claims throughout. 

F.1 Anatomy and Rationale of the Recovery Benchmark 

Why a constructed benchmark is needed. The object of evaluation is not theorem proving from a supplied statement, but the recovery of a plausible theorem-level advance from the mathematical boundary that preceded it. A purely open-ended task cannot provide a stable reference for this purpose: two systems may select different topics, and judgments of novelty or importance then become inseparable from topic choice. Conversely, revealing a later theorem would reduce the task to restatement or proof completion. We therefore construct a retrospective benchmark in which a later pa-per supplies an external evaluation anchor while remaining completely withheld from generation. This design fixes what counts as successful recovery without making the answer part of the input. 

What one benchmark case contains. As defined in Sec-tion D.2, a case contains a broad description di, seven pre-cutoff source cards Si, and a hidden target record Ti. The first two objects are visible to both systems; Ti is opened only by the evaluator after outputs are frozen. The example below is an abbreviated, format-level rendering of such a case in decentralized optimization. It illustrates what the benchmark looks like and how it is scored, but it is not an additional observation in the D001–D020 aggregate and none of its illustrative details enter the reported averages. 

Visible generation-side input. The broad case descrip-tion asks for at most three complete theorem-level advances beyond a supplied pre-2024 boundary in decentralized first-order optimization and gradient tracking. A candidate must close its mathematical setting and assumptions, define any new algorithmic object, state the direction and scope of its Dimension Weight Minimum Passing interpretation Correctness and falsification re-sistance 0.30 1.0 Definitions, domains, quantifiers, assumptions, and target duality close; no fatal toy, sign, scaling, circularity, or counterexample defect. Source-subtracted value 0.25 1.0 Both proof and valid refutation advance beyond the closest result and routine consequences. Bounded nonroutine difficulty 0.20 0.5 One to three mathematical cores remain and admit finite progress cer-tificates. Direct statement quality 0.15 1.0 The prover-facing statement is self-contained and checkable. Substantive partial mechanism 0.10 0.5 A correct candidate-relevant intermediate is established with an honest support boundary. 

Table 7: Critic-aligned quality rubric. conclusion, report a quantitative regime when the evidence supports one, and name a direct failure or falsification con-dition. The description does not request flexible gradient tracking, a Pareto frontier, or any particular rate. Both generation systems receive this description together with exactly the same seven-card public pack. Table 8 records the mathematical content visible at generation time. Card identifiers are public handles, not bibliographic identifiers. The source cards contain only four fields: setting, resolved conclusions, mechanisms, and limitations. They omit titles, authors, venues, URLs, persistent identifiers, filenames, the-orem numbers, and post-cutoff citations. The target paper and any source that directly discloses its central construction are excluded. Thus the input supplies ingredients such as repeated consensus, accelerated gossip, stochastic neighbor-hoods, and separate resource lower bounds without supplying their later theorem-level assembly. 

Evaluator-only target record. Neither MECA nor the Draft–Audit–Revise baseline receives the following informa-tion during generation. After their output sets are frozen, the target-alignment evaluator opens the corresponding record. Under the five-field evaluation used in the first experiment of the main paper, a representative record requires the following reconstruction. 

• Setting. There are n nodes with possibly heterogeneous, non-i.i.d. local distributions Di, local objectives 

fi(x) = Eξi∼D i [fi(x; ξi)] , f (x) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

fi(x),

and a connected static mixing network. The result covers strongly convex, convex, and smooth nonconvex objec-tives. 

• Assumptions. Each fi is L-smooth and the global ob-jective is bounded below. The stochastic gradients have uniformly bounded variance, 

E

h

∥∇ fi(x; ξi) − ∇ fi(x)∥2i

≤ σ2.

The mixing matrix W is doubly stochastic and satisfies 

W 1 = 1, 1⊤W = 1⊤,ρW := ∥W − J∥22 < 1, J = 1

n 11 ⊤.

Convexity or μ-strong convexity is added only for the corresponding convex or strongly convex theorem branch. 

• Conclusion. The new object is FlexGT, a snapshot gradient-tracking method that independently chooses β

local stochastic updates and α communication steps in each round. Gradients within the round are evaluated at the round snapshot rather than at every changing local iter-ate. Acc-FlexGT replaces direct repeated communication by accelerated gossip when graph information is avail-able. The main theorem gives: a linear strongly-convex Lyapunov recursion with separate centralized stochastic-noise and topology-effect terms; an averaged sublinear objective-gap bound in the convex regime; and an aver-aged sublinear stationarity bound 

1

K

> K−1

X

> k=0

E∥∇ f (¯ xβk )∥2

in the nonconvex regime. 

• Quantitative regime. For the nonconvex Acc-FlexGT corollary, the target record includes the graph-dependent communication schedule 

α =

& max {ln 2 , 12 ln( β max {n, R 0})}

p1 − √ρW

'

and the round complexity 

bK = O

 Lϵ + Lσ 2

nβϵ 2



E[f (¯ x0) − f ⋆]



,

subject to the theorem’s stepsize condition. 

• Boundary behavior. The pair (α, β ) is a genuine communication–computation trade-off: increasing one resource need not improve the other, and the nondom-inated choices form a Pareto frontier. After resource tun-ing, the target summarizes the Acc-FlexGT nonconvex costs as 

eO

 L2σ2

nϵ 2 + Lϵ(1 − ρW )



iterations and 

eO

 Lϵ(1 − ρW )



communications ,

matching the referenced lower bounds up to logarithmic factors. A statement of only one empirically preferred weighted cost, without the Pareto claim or the lower-bound comparison, does not recover this boundary field. Card Setting Resolved result and exposed mechanism S01 Smooth strongly convex decentralized empirical-risk mini-mization on a fixed connected network. A tracked global-gradient surrogate can be used in regularized local subproblems. With K               

> averaging rounds, the card records an effective mixing factor βmix =βK
> 0and separate local-computation and communication dependence. S02 Smooth convex decentralized optimization over time-varying graphs. Nesterov-style acceleration can be coupled to gradient tracking. Multiple-consensus and accelerated-gossip variants expose explicit gradient-versus-communication complexity. S03 Smooth strongly convex optimization on a fixed directed graph with deterministically quantized messages. Quantized primal and tracking innovations retain exact linear convergence when their scales decay compatibly with a lifted error recursion. S04 Smooth strongly convex decentralized optimization over time-varying networks under first-order oracle models. Communication and local-gradient complexities have separate lower bounds; multi-consensus primal-dual constructions attain corresponding upper bounds. S05 Smooth optimization on a fixed general directed network with compressed messages. Compressed push–pull gradient tracking is controlled through a joint spectral-radius con-dition for optimality, disagreement, tracking, and compression errors. S06 Smooth strongly convex optimization over time-varying strongly connected directed graphs. Row-stochastic primal mixing and column-stochastic tracking yield global linear conver-gence by closing a three-error comparison recursion. S07 Distributed stochastic optimization with gradient tracking over time-varying directed networks. Moving weighted contractions give linear convergence to a variance-dependent neighbor-hood under smooth strong convexity.

Table 8: The seven anonymous source cards visible to both systems in the representative benchmark rendering. Each card also states limitations of its own result; none states what the hidden target contributes. In the benchmark implementation, each field is stored at finer atomic resolution so that the evaluator can distinguish recovering the theorem’s direction from recovering its as-sumptions, quantitative strength, or validity boundary. This decomposition is important: topical similarity alone cannot receive a high score, and a stronger-looking claim is penal-ized when it removes an assumption needed by the target result. 

How the source cards support, but do not reveal, the target. The target can be approached only by compos-ing evidence across cards. S01 suggests treating the num-ber of consensus rounds as a resource; S02 supplies multi-consensus and accelerated-gossip mechanisms; S04 supplies the communication-versus-local-oracle lower-bound per-spective; and S07 supplies the stochastic-gradient-tracking error decomposition. At the same time, the cards leave gen-uine reconstruction work. S01 is fixed-network and strongly-convex or quadratic, S02 is not a heterogeneous stochastic snapshot method, S04 does not identify an algorithm-specific Pareto frontier, and S07 fixes one communication exchange per update. No individual card therefore states FlexGT, the independent (α, β ) design, the three-regime theorem, or the target complexity law. 

Same-candidate evaluation example. Suppose a frozen output defines snapshot gradient tracking with independently tunable local-update and communication counts and recov-ers the nonconvex complexity dependence on n, β, σ2,and ϵ. However, suppose that the same output replaces the static doubly-stochastic network by an unsupported time-varying directed model, omits bounded stochastic variance, and claims exact fixed-stepsize convergence in the strongly convex case despite nonzero variance. The evaluator may give this document strong credit for the new object and quantitative regime, and partial credit for the nonconvex conclusion. It loses setting and assump-tions credit because the target theorem is not stated under a compatible network and oracle model. Its exact-convergence claim conflicts with the target’s stochastic residual and is a central contradiction, rather than a harmless omission. If the document also omits the Pareto frontier and lower-bound comparison, another output cannot provide those missing boundary claims: the evaluator scores one complete candi-date against the target and never splices fields across the system’s other conjectures. 

Information-boundary interpretation. This format is target-conditioned because the frozen target record deter-mines which mathematical facts receive evaluation credit. It remains article-blind because generation sees only the broad task and the seven earlier anonymous cards; the title, iden-tifier, target decomposition, and evaluation feedback appear only after the outputs are immutable. The protocol therefore tests reconstruction of a hidden theorem-level contribution from a bounded earlier neighborhood. It does not test title completion, and it does not claim that the model has para-metrically forgotten all post-2023 mathematics. 

Why this is a reasonable evaluation benchmark. The benchmark is constructed rather than sampled from an ex-isting task suite because the desired construct requires both an earlier evidence boundary and a later theorem-level refer-ence. Its validity does not rest on treating our annotations as a substitute for mathematical truth. The central result of a later paper provides the external anchor; benchmark construction only controls which earlier evidence is visible and decom-poses that result into auditable fields. Target conditioning removes variation caused by systems choosing different top-ics, while article blindness prevents direct lookup or copying. The seven-card packs preserve established facts, proof mech-anisms, and known failure regimes, so success still requires combining distributed evidence rather than guessing from a title or reproducing a supplied theorem. The comparison is further controlled by freezing targets and source packs before generation, enforcing the same tem-poral cutoff, giving both systems identical inputs and output caps, freezing all candidate texts before evaluator access to 

Ti, and scoring every dimension on one candidate rather than assembling the best fields from several outputs. These controls make the benchmark suitable for the paper’s com-parative question: whether a mechanism-centered construc-tion process more reliably recovers a hidden mathematical advance from the same bounded evidence. 

Scope. This benchmark does not measure unrestricted topic discovery, historical priority, or parameter-level for-getting of post-cutoff work. Nor does it claim that the 20 targets represent all of mathematics. It measures the nar-rower and directly auditable capability needed here: recover-ing the setting, assumptions, conclusion, quantitative regime, and boundary behavior of a withheld theorem-level advance from a controlled snapshot of earlier mathematical evidence. 

F.2 Candidate–Mechanism Co-Evolution with an Open Technical Core 

The case “Memory-dependent switch of the most stable directed-weight corner” concerns the sharp stepsize bound-ary of a two-agent directed gradient tracker with recon-struction memory and one stale communication phase. Its archived trace contains the anchor, candidate, mechanism, coverage, challenge, and projection records. The case re-mains unresolved because detailed verification did not close the final global certificate. 

Source boundary, Raw Seed, and frozen anchor The Raw Seed records three closest-result shapes: linear con-vergence of compressed gradient tracking, sufficient conver-gence conditions for directed compressed push–pull track-ing, and directed asynchronous tracking with bounded de-lays. Those result shapes do not provide a necessary-and-sufficient boundary for the simultaneous memory-and-delay recurrence below or classify the weights that maximize such a boundary. The archived example retains this derived source-boundary record rather than reproducing the underlying pri-vate source documents. It therefore illustrates the construc-tion trace, not an independently complete literature audit. For a, b ∈ [1 /4, 3/4] , communication alternates between 

A0 =

1 0

a 1 − a



, B0 =

1 − b 0

b 1



,A1 =

1 − a a

0 1



, B1 =

1 b

0 1 − b



.

(4) The local objectives are fi(z) = 12 (z − ri)2. For q ∈

[1 /4, 1/2] , the memories are 

Hx = (1 − q)hx + qx, Hy = (1 − q)hy + qy. (5) Phase zero mixes the preceding memories, phase one mixes the new memories, and the constant-stepsize recurrence is 

xk+1 = xk + ( Ak − I)hk−dk 

> x

− αy k,yk+1 = yk + ( Bk − I)hk−dk 

> y

+ ( xk+1 − r) − (xk − r),

(6) where (d0, d 1) = (1 , 0) , y0 = x0 − r, and the missing memory history is zero. The Raw Seed asks whether the initialized reachable dynamics have a sharp connected-from-zero stability endpoint and whether memory and delay affect it nonseparably. The immutable anchor can be summarized as 

A = ( o, PA, BA, FA). (7) Here o is the initialized reachable quotient of the two-period tracker, PA contains the recurrence and assumptions above, 

BA is the recorded closest-result boundary, and FA forbids replacing the recurrence, interpreting q as lossy compres-sion, discarding reachable modes, or defining away a miss-ing endpoint proof. The tracker invariant excludes a stable biased-consensus limit, so such a limit was not treated as the proposed new failure mode. 

From a fixed slice to a bifurcation candidate An ac-cepted candidate in the anchored portfolio fixed q = 1 /2 and included the claim 

p0 : arg max 

> (a,b )∈[1 /4,3/4] 2

α⋆(1 /2, a, b ) = {(1 /4, 1/4) }. (8) Its accepted mechanism, denoted here by mslice , exposed the following interface: 

Req( mslice ) = {P A, q = 1 /2, stale cell },

Prov( mslice ) = {quintic and Cayley reduction },

Gap( mslice ) = {first contact and global extrema }.

(9) If Md is the exact two-period monodromy, direct block mul-tiplication gives 

det( tI 8 − Md) = ( t − 1)( t − 1/4) 2p(t; a, b, α ), (10) where p is monic of degree five. The optimizer direction and a strictly Schur double memory root can therefore be removed before studying the remaining contacts. With the Cayley substitution, 

(1 − iu )5p

 1 + iu 

1 − iu 



= R(u) + iI (u), (11) every nonreal unit-circle contact satisfies R = I = 0 . This is a checkable reduction, but it does not prove the maximizer in (8). The next exploration varied q. Its numerical attack data were 

q α⋆(q, 3/4, 1/4) α⋆(q, 1/4, 1/4) 1/4 1.966716 1.963166 1/2 1.927152 1.931347 

(12) and a provisional crossing was observed near q =0.370460332 . These values are reconnaissance, not a proof of endpoint identity, global maximality, or crossing unique-ness. They do refute the attempted q-uniform extrapolation of one preferred corner and motivate a sharper candidate p1:the global maximizer switches once as q varies. The implementation stores p0 and p1 as sibling candi-dates under the same immutable anchor, rather than as revi-sions of one candidate record. Accordingly, the arrow p0 ⇝A

p1 below denotes portfolio-level candidate–mechanism co-evolution, not an in-place edit. Thus the update is substantive: the mathematical object re-mains fixed by A, while the candidate scope and the required mechanism both change in response to an identified failure of extrapolation. Field p0 p1 Mathematical trigger Parameter scope Fixed slice q = 1 /2 Joint prism q ∈ [1 /4, 1/2] The preferred corner reverses between two admis-sible slices. Conclusion One fixed maximizing corner One unique corner switch, with both corners tied at the switch A q-uniform monotonicity sign in a is incompat-ible with the attack data. Switch localization Not applicable Unique qc ∈ (7 /20 , 3/8) The numerical crossing is used only to bound a theorem-level target. Refutation target Failure of the fixed-slice endpoint or ex-tremizer clauses Endpoint failure, a competing maximizer, or zero/multiple switches The joint claim must have direct, in-scope falsi-fiers. Required certificate Weight-box boundary analysis First-contact and global-extremizer analysis on a three-parameter prism Corner samples cannot exclude interior, edge, or degenerate cells. 

Table 9: Portfolio-level evolution from p0 to p1 under mechanism support and counterexample pressure. 

Joint mechanism and honest support boundary The ac-cepted joint mechanism extends the spectral reduction sym-bolically in q. It is stored as one mechanism record; for ex-position only, we display two derived nodes mspec → mext .The first gives 

det( tI 8 −Md) = ( t−1)  t−(1 −q)22p(t; q, a, b, α ), (13) where p is monic quintic and (1 − q)2 ∈ [1 /4, 9/16] . For 

0 < α ≤ 2,

p(1) = 2 abαq 2  (2 − q)2(α − 2) 2 + αbq 2 > 0, (14) and the accepted exact certificate gives p(−1) < 0 on the full prism. Consequently, any remaining unit-circle contact in this slab is nonreal. For such a contact, put 

H = (1 − iu )5p

 1 + iu 

1 − iu 



= R + iI (15) and define 

∆ = RuIα − RαIu,Na = IuRa − RuIa, Nb = IuRb − RuIb. (16) At a simple contact with ∆̸ = 0 , implicit differentiation yields 

∂aα = Na

∆ , ∂bα = Nb

∆ . (17) Every smooth interior extremum is therefore contained in the finite algebraic system R = I = Na = Nb = 0 . Edge extrema use the corresponding tangential numerator; the de-generacy system R = I = ∆ = 0 is retained separately. The two expository interfaces are 

Req( mspec ) = PA ∪ { 0 < α ≤ 2},

Prov( mspec ) = {quintic factorization , t ̸ = ±1},

Gap( mspec ) = {reachability, first contact, simplicity },

Req( mext ) = Prov( mspec ) ∪ { ∆̸ = 0 , smooth branch },

Prov( mext ) = {R = I = Na = Nb = 0 },

Gap( mext ) = {cell isolation, switch uniqueness }.

(18) They compose as 

PAmspec 

−−−−→ nonreal quintic contacts 

> mext

−−−→ finite extremum cells . (19) The Coverage Judge returned 

ρ = SubstantivePartial . (20) The support is substantive because an eight-dimensional spectral search is reduced to an exact quintic contact problem and finite algebraic extremum systems. It remains partial for two precise reasons: 1. prove connected-from-zero first contact, reachable rank, finite positivity, and continuity of α⋆ throughout the prism, including α = 2 − q and ∆ = 0 ;2. isolate every interior, edge, corner, and degenerate cell and prove that the two proposed corner branches cross exactly once, with no third maximizer at the crossing. A root of the Cayley system is therefore only a candidate contact. The mechanism has not shown that the root is reach-able, first, simple, or outward transverse. This is the sup-port boundary that prevents a plausible reduction from being counted as a solution. 

Statement-blind challenge and prover-facing projection 

The Final Challenger received the candidate statement with-out the mechanism graph or exploration history. It tested 

(q, a, b, α ) = (1 /4, 3/4, 1/4, 1/10) under the exact recur-rence. The initialized Krylov space had rank eight, the op-timizer vector was fixed, and after removing only that opti-mizer root the approximate moduli were 

0.740272 (2) , 0.807797 (2) , 0.810479 , 0.5625 (2) .

(21) This attack found a stable neighborhood rather than a coun-terexample. The Challenger also passed definition closure, target duality, source-relative value, and bounded difficulty, and returned Accept for prover handoff. This acceptance does not establish the corner switch. To state the projection, let Md = T1T0 act on s =(x, y, h x, h y ) ∈ R8 and define 

I = {(x0, x 0 − r, 0, 0) : x0, r ∈ R2},K(Md) = span {M jd v : v ∈ I , 0 ≤ j ≤ 7},O = span {(1, 0, 1, 0) }.

(22) Let C(q, a, b ) be the tracker-reachably Schur-stable compo-nent adjacent to α = 0 , set α⋆(q, a, b ) = sup C(q, a, b ), and write 

Max( q) = arg max 

> (a,b )∈[1 /4,3/4] 2

α⋆(q, a, b ). (23) Final prover-facing conjecture q1. Under (4)–(6), for every 

(q, a, b ) ∈ [1 /4, 1/2] ×[1 /4, 3/4] 2, the component C(q, a, b )

exists, its endpoint is finite and positive, and α⋆ is continuous on the closed prism. There is a unique qc ∈ (7 /20 , 3/8) such that 

Max( q) = 



{(3 /4, 1/4) }, 1/4 ≤ q < q c,

{(3 /4, 1/4) , (1 /4, 1/4) }, q = qc,

{(1 /4, 1/4) }, qc < q ≤ 1/2.

(24) The refutation branch permits any admissible witness to a missing, nonpositive, infinite, or discontinuous endpoint; an interior, edge, or different-corner maximizer; no switch or multiple switches; or an additional maximizer at qc. A floating-point comparison or failure of one proposed mech-anism is not a refutation. In the pipeline notation, 

q1 = Θ( A, p 1, G ′). (25) The projection closes notation and makes the two logical tar-gets explicit. It does not add assumptions, remove parameter cells, or weaken the maximizer law. 

QED handoff and audited outcome Blind QED inde-pendently recovered a useful reachable-rank reduction. If 

E : R4 → R8 injects the allowed initialization coordinates, then exact block algebra gives 

det[ E, M dE] = q4(q − 2) 2(α + q − 2) 2. (26) Thus K(Md) = R8 away from α = 2 − q. A proof candidate then identified a seven-dimensional invariant reachable space on the exceptional locus, recovered the quintic factorization in (13), and supplied finite certificate artifacts for its proposed global sign and switch argument. This is substantive, independently checkable partial progress, not a verified proof of the conjecture. The structural review completed, but the detailed review stopped while in-dependently rerunning the exact global certificate and never issued a terminal verdict. The remaining audit obligations were the defining polynomials, complete rational leaf data, sign controls, equality cells, and resultant isolation. The subsequent unresolved-problem audit classified the case as 

Unresolved–TechnicalDifficulty . (27) No formulation ambiguity, missing assumption, or direct counterexample had been established. The unresolved core is the exact global certification connecting the accepted spectral reductions to first-contact order, continuity, global-extremizer exclusion, and uniqueness of the switch. 

F.3 Terminal QED Closure by Verified Refutation 

The conjecture “Punctured global OMWU robustness radius for perturbed rock–paper–scissors” provides the complemen-tary case: QED found and verified a refutation after repairing a local error in the first proof. 

Prover-facing statement and refutation target Let 

R =

0 −1 11 0 −1

−1 1 0

!

, C =

2 −1 −1

−1 2 −1

−1 −1 2

!

,

(28) and give the column player payoff matrix Mϵ = −R +

ϵC . Fix η = 1/4. From a two-step history h =(x(−1) , x (0) , y (−1) , y (0)) ∈ (int ∆ 3)4, exact OMWU uses the payoff vectors 

gxt = 2 Ry (t) − Ry (t − 1) ,gyt = 2 M Tϵ x(t) − M Tϵ x(t − 1) , (29) and the normalized updates 

xi(t + 1) = xi(t)egxt,i /4

P 

> k

xk(t)egxt,k /4 ,yj (t + 1) = yj (t)egyt,j /4

P 

> k

yk(t)egyt,k /4 .

(30) Let u = (1 /3, 1/3, 1/3) and 

dϵh(t) =  ∥x(t) − u∥22 + ∥y(t) − u∥22

1/2 . (31) For |ϵ| ≤ 1/10 , define 

G = {ϵ : dϵh(t) → 0 for every h ∈ (int ∆ 3)4},r⋆ = sup {r ∈ [0 , 1/10] : 0 < |ϵ| < r =⇒ ϵ ∈ G} . (32) The positive branch asks for an r0 > 0 giving convergence from every strictly interior history whenever 0 < |ϵ| < r 0.The explicit refutation branch asks for distinct nonzero ϵn →

0 and strictly interior histories hn satisfying 

lim sup 

> t→∞

dϵn 

> hn

(t) > 0 for every n. (33) Boundary histories, local instability, finite escape, and di-verging transient times do not meet this target. 

Exact refutation mechanism Write ϵ = −δ with δ > 0,set P = I − 13 11 T , and let σ be softmax. Centered logits 

zt = P log x(t) and wt = P log y(t) satisfy the exact lift 

zt+1 = zt + 14 R 2σ(wt) − σ(wt−1),wt+1 = wt + 14 (R + ϵC ) 2σ(zt) − σ(zt−1).

(34) This change of variables is exact in both directions for finite logits, so it does not introduce boundary histories or alter the OMWU convention. At large logit scale, softmax approaches the maximizing action and the lifted dynamics approach a piecewise-linear tropical system. QED found the six-switch itinerary 

(1 , 3) → (1 , 2) → (3 , 2) → (3 , 1) 

→ (2 , 1) → (2 , 3) → (1 , 3) . (35) Exact composition of the six constant-velocity chambers gives a Poincaré return p 7 → Mδ p. Its exact algebra estab-lishes det Mδ = 1 ,χδ (1) = − 243 32 δ(1 + 3 δ2) < 0,λδ = 1 + 18 5 δ + O(δ2) > 1.

(36) The expanding eigenvalue is simple for all sufficiently small 

δ > 0; the other two multipliers have modulus λ−1/2 

> δ

< 1.At δ = 0 , every intended switch is transverse with crossing speed 1/2, and the nonswitching action is separated from the tie by the exact margin 3. Hence a projective neighborhood of the expanding eigenray preserves the same itinerary for small positive δ.The optimistic two-step term does not accumulate over a circuit. Summing (34) gives the exact telescoping identity 

zn −z0 = 14

> n−1

X

> t=0

Rσ (wt)+ 14 R σ(wn−1)−σ(w−1), (37) with an analogous identity for w. After division by a logit radius A → ∞ , the endpoint term vanishes. Away from the six transverse tie layers, the softmax error is exponentially small; the tie layers occupy vanishing scaled time and have no competing switch because of the strict third-action margin. The exact one-circuit return is therefore 

Rδ (p) = Mδ p + o(∥p∥) (38) uniformly on a compact cone around the expanding eigenray. The spectral gap then yields a forward-invariant subcone on which the exact return expands the radial coordinate by a factor greater than one. Starting at any sufficiently large but finite radius in that cone gives one fixed exact orbit, not a family of increas-ingly long transients. Finite logits yield a strictly interior four-profile history. Along successive circuits the logit radius diverges, and at the designated phase midpoint the profiles tend to (e1, e 3). Since 

 ∥e1 − u∥22 + ∥e3 − u∥22

1/2 = p4/3 > 1, (39) the resulting exact orbit satisfies 

lim sup 

> t→∞

d−δh (t) ≥ 1. (40) Choose a sufficiently small ¯δ > 0 for which the cone con-struction holds and set 

ϵn = − ¯δn + 1 . (41) For every n, the preceding construction supplies a strictly interior history with the persistent limsup in (40). The bad parameters are distinct and converge to zero, so every positive candidate radius contains one. Therefore 

r⋆ = 0 . (42) 

Verifier-requested repair The first proof attempt con-tained one local numerical error: it described the nonswitch-ing margin in the tropical itinerary as 6, while exact re-construction of the displayed switching endpoints gives 3.The regulator returned REVISE_PROOF . It did not accept the otherwise plausible chain merely because the argument needed only a positive margin. The revised proof replaced 6 by 3 and made the robust-ness step explicit: by continuity, a margin greater than 3/2

persists in a sufficiently small neighborhood. Independent reconstruction then confirmed the six hitting times, return matrix, and final goal. Thus (42) is a verified refutation, un-like the incomplete certificate in Section F.2. 

F.4 What the Two Cases Establish 

The comparison isolates the substantive difference between useful partial support and a completed mathematical resolu-tion: the first trace narrows the problem to a specific global certificate, whereas the second closes its stated refutation branch. 

# G Prompt and Skill Design 

MECA does not use a single monolithic prompt or an uncon-strained running conversation. Each model call combines a stage-specific role prompt , a possibly empty set of reusable 

mathematical skills , and a frozen snapshot of the current research state. These components have deliberately differ-ent responsibilities. The role prompt states what decision the agent is authorized to make; the skills specify how the relevant mathematical reasoning should be carried out; the run artifacts contain the particular sources, candidate, and mechanisms to be examined; and the host controller decides whether the returned record is valid enough to change the pipeline state. In short,       

> role prompt +skill references +frozen artifacts
> PrΣ( r, t )Xt

defines the model-visible call for role r at stage t, while promotion, repair, rejection, and checkpoint updates remain host-owned operations. This separation is important: a well-formed JSON response is only a proposal or an audit result, not evidence that the mathematics is correct. 

G.1 Four-Layer Instruction Architecture 

Table 11 summarizes the instruction boundary. A prompt is role-specific and action-oriented. A skill is a versioned pro-cedural reference such as a source-subtraction test, a coun-terexample protocol, or a mechanism-composition audit. A skill is not an additional agent, a learned module, or a source of mathematical facts. It does not update state and it cannot authorize an assumption. Finally, the host controller enforces the output schema, stage transition, lineage, and budget in-dependently of the language model. The distinction also makes the design easier to audit. Changing the output contract of the Mechanism–Frontier Explorer changes one role prompt; improving the boundary-case protocol changes one skill shared by several critics; and changing a candidate changes only the referenced artifact. The three changes therefore have separate identities in the run manifest. 

G.2 Prompt Design Principles 

All production prompts follow five principles. 

Stage-local authority. Each role has a finite action space. A Seed Scout may generate, repair, or replace one seed, but it may not prescribe the proof mechanism. The Mechanism– Frontier Explorer may propose one mechanism or revise the frontier, but it may not certify its own proposal. A Coverage Judge may select and compose reviewed mechanisms, but it may not rewrite them. Restricting each call to one state transition makes failures attributable and prevents a single response from silently generating, judging, and accepting its own argument. Property Directed-weight corner switch OMWU robustness radius Primary role Candidate–mechanism co-evolution under afixed anchor Repair and verification of an explicit refutation Established support Exact spectral reduction with a stated support boundary Complete centered-logit, tropical-return, and invariant-cone argument Remaining core First-contact/continuity certification and unique global-maximizer switch None in the accepted proof Final status Unresolved–TechnicalDifficulty Verified refutation with r⋆ = 0 

Table 10: The two examples serve complementary evidentiary roles.                

> Layer Main question Contents Delivery and authority Role prompt What must this agent de-cide? Role, visible inputs, permitted actions, prohibited moves, and the exact response contract. One prompt file is selected for each call; it may propose a state transition but cannot commit it. Skill bundle How should the mathemat-ics be tested? Reusable procedures for retrieval, source subtrac-tion, seed construction, falsification, mechanism discovery, interface replay, composition, and the-oremization. Only role-relevant skill paths are supplied. Skills advise reasoning but do not provide evidence or state authority. Run artifacts What mathematical instance is under review? Frozen source pack, exact candidate revision, re-viewed mechanisms, critic records, and optional memory. Artifacts stay on disk and are named by absolute paths; their bodies are not dupli-cated in the prompt. Host controller May the result change the run? Parsing, schema checks, revision hashes, legal deci-sions, repair budgets, invalidation, and checkpoint commits. Deterministic code validates the response and applies or rejects the transition.

Table 11: The four layers used to construct a MECA model call. The division prevents procedural advice, run memory, and schema compliance from being mistaken for mathematical evidence. 

Mathematical work before labels. Prompts ask for the first nonroutine derivation, an explicit positive toy case, and a hostile in-scope test before asking for a verdict. Phrases such as “plausible by standard arguments” or “no counterex-ample was found” do not support promotion. A surviving counterexample audit must identify a concrete instance, ver-ify its assumptions, calculate the target observable, and state what the calculation does or does not falsify. 

Explicit epistemic boundaries. Prompts distinguish prim-itive assumptions, established source results, candidate mechanism outputs, and unresolved obligations. A desired conclusion, certificate, or downstream mechanism output may not be inserted as an assumption. Likewise, an accep-tance receipt records that a mechanism passed the configured review; it does not turn the mechanism into a theorem. 

Bounded repair. A repair prompt receives the exact re-jected revision and a revision-bound critic contract. It may correct the named mathematical or statement defect, but it may not change portfolio slots, broaden the novelty claim, replace the research object, or weaken the frontier merely to fit the current mechanism. If the defect requires a different direction, the controller routes to replacement or rejection instead of calling the change a repair. 

Deliberate information asymmetry. Roles receive only the information required by their audit. In particular, the Fi-nal Challenger reads the candidate, target anchor, reviewed seed, and source pack, but not the mechanism graph, cov-erage decision, or critic receipts. The independent prover probes receive the prover-facing statement rather than the construction trace. These restrictions test the statement it-self instead of inviting later agents to repeat the pipeline’s preferred route. 

G.3 Runtime Assembly and File-Referenced Context 

Executable role prompts are loaded from src/prompts/ single_mechanism/multi_mechanism/ . Mathe-matical skills are stored separately under src/prompts/ common/skills/ . The runtime does not concatenate skill contents, source packs, memory, branch blackboards, or ar-tifact bodies into the prompt. Instead, it sends a compact control envelope containing routing scalars and absolute file references. A representative envelope is: {"stage": "joint_frontier_mechanism", "record_id": "candidate-id", "input_revision_hash": "<sha256>", "source_pack_file": "/abs/run/source_pack.json", "artifact_files": {"candidate": "/abs/run/candidate.json", "mechanisms": "/abs/run/mechanisms.jsonl" }, "skill_reference_files": ["/abs/repo/skills/mechanism.md" ], "memory_files": { "run_memory": "/abs/run/memory.jsonl" }}

The role process reads the referenced files when needed. This design keeps the stable instruction text distinct from large and evolving state, binds a call to an exact revision, and avoids producing different effective prompts merely be-cause a JSONL history has grown. It also makes the evidence boundary inspectable: run memory can discourage repeti-tion, but it is process context, not literature evidence, and it cannot enlarge the frozen source pack. Because local files are part of the interface, live runs use a local-file-capable model process. The asset registry fails closed when a required prompt or skill is missing or when an unregistered instruction file appears in the production directories. 

G.4 Prompt Families Across the Pipeline 

Table 12 gives the principal prompt families. Repair and re-placement prompts are separate files because their authority is narrower than that of the corresponding generation prompt. Mathematical and research critics are also separate calls: the former attacks correctness and counterexamples, whereas the latter attacks source-relative novelty, value, and readiness. A passing result on one axis cannot conceal a blocker on the other. 

G.5 Condensed Operative Prompt Templates 

For readability, the templates below omit repeated JSON field declarations and runtime bookkeeping. They preserve the operative mathematical instructions and decision boundaries. The released Markdown files are authoritative for the exact prompts used in the experiments. 

Seed Scout. 

Read the frozen source pack, the assigned portfolio brief, and the permitted run memory. Produce exactly one research-grade direction, not a final theorem or proof plan. Identify the closest result and subtract what it already establishes. State the remaining bounded, nonroutine delta and any un-resolved source-coverage risk. Name the central object, con-trolled quantity, assumption-to-conclusion direction, and ev-ery authorized premise. Give the decisive bottleneck, one informative toy case, and at least two concrete failure tests. Do not include a named mechanism, bridge recipe, desired conclusion as an assumption, or prose outside the required JSON object. 

Raw-seed critics. 

Read the exact seed revision. The mathematical critic must locate the weakest implied step, attempt its first nontrivial derivation, and instantiate an in-scope toy or boundary fam-ily; it must verify assumptions and calculate the target ob-servable. The research critic must identify the closest result, subtract routine consequences, and decide whether a mean-ingful delta and a usable next-stage problem remain. Return all requested dimensions even when one fails. Diagnose but do not repair the artifact. 

Mechanism–Frontier Explorer. 

Review the complete candidate state and choose exactly one legal transition. When proposing a mechanism, state an ac-tual proof object, its key move, the first nonroutine calcula-tion, ordered derived steps, exactly one residual bottleneck, and a typed requirement–consequence interface. Run both a positive calculation and a hostile in-scope test. Revise the frontier only when the mathematics exposes a false, vague, trivial, source-covered, or unbounded target; never weaken it merely to make the current route succeed. Emit only after reviewed mechanisms give substantive support and a finite nonroutine core remains. Quarantine a credible proof or assumption-checked counterexample rather than presenting a solved claim as open. 

Mechanism Critic and Coverage Judge. 

Replay the mechanism from its declared inputs. Check do-mains, quantifiers, signs, constants, limiting regimes, cir-cularity, source subtraction, a worked positive cell, and a worked obstruction cell. Promotion requires a correct, closed, candidate-relevant contribution, not merely a com-plete schema. For coverage, ignore proposal order, choose a minimal nonredundant set, and replay interfaces in topolog-ical order. An output becomes available only after a selected predecessor establishes the identical mathematical quantity. If a hidden lemma or semantic jump remains, request one missing kind of support without prescribing its solution. 

Final Challenger. 

Read only the candidate, immutable anchor, reviewed seed, and frozen source pack. Do not inspect mechanisms or their reviews. Close every definition, domain, quantifier, and as-sumption; verify that the positive and refutation targets use the same scope; calculate a direct in-scope counterexam-ple test; subtract the closest source result; and identify both a finite progress certificate and the remaining nonroutine bottleneck. A failed proof route is not a refutation of the candidate. Accept, request bounded statement repair, split, reject, or quarantine a genuine resolution. 

These templates intentionally combine positive construc-tion requirements with explicit prohibitions. The prohibitions encode recurrent failure modes: assumption smuggling, nov-elty inflation, mechanism-shaped seeds, self-review, frontier weakening, circular dependency, and the misclassification of a failed route as a counterexample to the target. 

G.6 The Mathematical Skill Library 

Skills turn general role instructions into repeatable mathe-matical procedures. They are attached selectively rather than globally: the Seed Scout needs source-gap and attack-surface skills, the Mechanism Critic needs derivation and interface audits, and the Final Challenger is intentionally denied the mechanism bundle. Table 13 summarizes the main families and representative files. Stage Prompt family Mathematical task Allowed result Main skill family Seed planning Portfolio Planner Partition a broad focus into dis-tinct source-relative directions with-out proposing the theorem or mech-anism. Exactly m fixed slot briefs and overlap exclusions. Source-gap dis-covery, route taxonomy, contri-bution boundary. Seed construc-tion Seed Scout Subtract the closest result, expose a bounded delta, list authorized premises, and give a bottleneck and falsification surface. One new, repaired, or replace-ment Raw Seed. Evidence ledger, claim-shape con-tract, failure tests, memory-aware selection. Seed review Mathematical and Re-search Critics Independently test derivability, coun-terexamples, source coverage, re-search value, and handoff readiness. Per-dimension survive, repair, reject, or incomplete decisions. Correctness, counterexample, novelty/value, and readiness attacks. Co-exploration Mechanism–Frontier Ex-plorer Jointly revise the candidate and pro-pose one mechanism with an explicit proof object, interface, calculation, and residual gap. Propose/add mechanism, re-vise, split, emit, reject, or quar-antine a resolution. Joint frontier– mechanism dis-covery, evidence, typed-interface discipline. Independent re-view Mechanism Critic and Coverage Judge Replay local derivations, then com-pose only accepted interfaces and lo-cate the exact remaining gap. Promote/repair/reject a mech-anism; or request support, re-vise, emit, split, reject, or quar-antine. Mechanism audit, bundle composi-tion, closure and chain audits. Final construc-tion Final Challenger and prover probes Audit statement closure, direct coun-terexamples, value, difficulty, and in-dependent solvability without relying on the preferred mechanism route. Accept, bounded repair, split, reject, resolution quarantine, and probe outcome. Statement audit and theoremiza-tion constraints; mechanism skills are withheld from isolated checks. 

Table 12: Principal MECA prompt families and their authority. The table groups prompts by mathematical function; the released prompt files contain the exact JSON response schemas. 

Source subtraction and contribution boundary The source-grounding skills operationalize novelty as a theorem-level difference rather than a topic-level similarity judgment. Given a proposed claim C and the closest established result 

S, an agent first removes the consequences of S that follow by routine specialization, notation change, or standard closure. The residue 

∆( C; S) = Claims( C) \ RoutineClosure( S)

must correspond to a concrete change in assumptions, geom-etry, regime, rate, complexity, obstruction, or theorem class. Formulation, unification, application, adaptivity, sharpness, or diagnostic value counts only when it changes such a math-ematical boundary. Uncertain coverage is recorded as a risk; it is not converted into a confident novelty claim. 

Concrete falsification protocol The counterexample skills require more than an invitation to “look for edge cases.” An attack record must specify a family and its parameters, verify that the primitive assumptions hold, identify the observable whose sign, bound, rank, limit, or asymptotic order is at issue, and perform the relevant calculation. The result is classified as breaking the candidate, narrowing its admissible scope, or surviving the named test. When no concrete test can be extracted from a record, the audit is incomplete rather than favorable. 

Mechanism interface and chain replay For a mechanism 

m, the interface skills distinguish 

Req( m), Prov( m), Gap( m).

Every nonprimitive requirement must be matched to the ex-act consequence of an earlier mechanism, including its do-main, quantifiers, parameter regime, and epistemic status. The critic then locates the first equation or inference that uses the dependency and replays the derivation. Coverage is recomputed in topological order rather than inferred from mechanism names or proposal order. Thus, several locally plausible arguments can still fail global composition when their constants, scopes, or quantifiers do not align. 

Theoremization without closing the problem The the-oremization skills convert an audited partial chain into a self-contained prove-or-refute statement. They may expand definitions, instantiate authorized primitives, align notation, and expose routine projection steps. They may not add a new lemma, certificate, invariant, transfer principle, or assump-tion. The positive target and refutation witness must live under the same scope, and failure of a suggested mechanism must not be presented as refutation of the target. The final task is retained only when the chain provides substantive sup-port while leaving a named, finite, and genuinely nonroutine obligation. Skill family Representative files Operational content Evidence and source grounding       

> literature_web_search ,
> evidence_ledger ,
> source_gap_seed_discovery
> Locate the closest result inside the allowed boundary, distin-guish cited fact from hypothesis, and retain source locators and coverage risks. Seed construction seed_route_taxonomy ,
> claim_shape_contract ,
> attack_surface_failure_tests ,
> contribution_boundary
> Choose a legitimate source-relative route, expose the central object and implication, forbid hidden target assumptions, and require concrete failure pressure. Adversarial review attack_correctness ,
> attack_counterexamples ,
> attack_novelty_value ,attack_ readiness_for_next_stage
> Separate four review dimensions and require an attempted derivation, an assumption-checked calculation, source sub-traction, and a usable but not over-solved handoff. Mechanism discovery expert_mechanism_discovery ,
> proof_pattern_mechanism_ extraction ,joint_frontier_ mechanism_discovery
> Compare competing proof objects, transfer only the mathe-matical core of a source argument, expose the first nonroutine step, and let calculations drive frontier revision. Interfaces and compo-sition
> joint_mechanism_interface ,
> mechanism_audit ,
> bundle_composition ,
> bundle_closure_audit
> Check exactly what each mechanism consumes and produces, reject circular or unavailable inputs, compose dependencies topologically, and recompute missing support independently. End-to-end task audit joint_chain_frontier_audit ,
> theoremization ,
> semi_open_audit
> Replay the whole chain from anchor assumptions, close the fi-nal statement, preserve positive/refutation duality and prove-nance, and verify that a finite unresolved core remains.

Table 13: Mathematical skill families used by MECA . For compactness, the table shows file stems without the .md suffix and omits a directory prefix when the family makes it unambiguous. Only the registered subset is exposed to a role. 

G.7 Memory Is Not a Skill 

Run memory records compact negative lessons such as a failed inequality, an invalid transfer, a source-covered direc-tion, or a counterexample family. It helps later agents avoid repeating the same failed route. A skill, by contrast, is a sta-ble procedure for performing an attack or construction. The two are never merged: memory may suggest which test to run, but only a fresh assumption check and calculation can support the current decision. Branch blackboards and critic summaries are governed by separate reading and compaction contracts, and they are passed by path only when memory is enabled. This distinction prevents an accumulation of model-generated claims from becoming an informal proof. It also permits ablations of memory while holding the prompts and mathematical skill library fixed. 

G.8 Reproducibility 

The implementation maintains an explicit registry from each role, and where necessary each stage–role pair, to one prompt file and a fixed tuple of skill files. At startup, the registry checks that every required file exists and that no unregis-tered Markdown file is silently active. Experimental mani-fests record the effective prompt, skill, runtime, source-pack, and configuration identities. Resuming a run is permitted only against the expected frozen state; changing a parent revision invalidates dependent reviews and compositions. The prose templates in this section explain the design and retain the decision-relevant instructions, but they are not a substitute for the released runtime assets. Exact reproduction should use the archived prompt and skill files associated with the reported manifest, together with the same output schemas and host-side gates. This qualification is material because prompts, skills, and controller semantics jointly determine the effective procedure; holding only the natural-language prompt fixed does not fully specify a MECA run. 

# H Blind Problem Collection 

This section reports the 100 statement-only mathematical problems used in the open-ended evaluation. The collection is grouped by the frozen audit outcome: 35 proved, 11 re-futed, and 54 unresolved. The labels summarize the indepen-dent verification outcome and are not exposed to the system during conjecture construction. Only problem statements are included; proofs, refutations, audit transcripts, and source identities are omitted. 

H.1 Proved Problems 

P001: Degree-two corruption threshold Problem. For integers r, n , let Cr,n denote the space of n×r

real matrices of rank r whose rows have unit Euclidean norm, and let Ds denote the symmetric zero-diagonal matrices whose off-diagonal support graphs have maximum degree at most s. Two factors which differ by a common right orthogo-nal transformation represent the same correlation matrix, so uniqueness below concerns the Gram matrix and the sparse term rather than the factor itself. Fix r = 5 , n = 13 , and s = 2 , and consider a noiseless equality 

M = U U T + S⋆ = V V T + T, ,U, V ∈ C 5,13 , S⋆, T ∈ D 2.The degree bounds on S⋆ and T are separate; merely requir-ing their union to have degree at most four is not sufficient. If F is the union of their support graphs and G = K13 \ F ,then U U T and V V T agree on the diagonal and on every edge of G. Call such a quadruple a degree-two ambiguity when 

U U T̸ = V V T.Genericity is imposed only on U . More precisely, in every relevant real irreducible component X of the unit-row con-figuration space, the exceptional set must be a proper real algebraic subset of the exact-rank-five locus X(5) . It must be fixed independently of the two support graphs and of the competitor V ; no genericity or proximity assumption is al-lowed for V . For reference, let AX ⊆ X(5) be the set of clean factors which occur in a degree-two ambiguity. A fac-tor is called full spark if every five of its rows are linearly independent. Decide whether, for every relevant component X, there is a nonempty relative real Zariski-open set O ⊆ X(5) , chosen independently of all supports and competitors, such that 

U ∈ O , S⋆, T ∈ D 2, ,V ∈ C 5,13 , ,U U T + S⋆ = V V T + T

always imply 

U U T = V V T and S⋆ = T. 

The required conclusion is global Gram uniqueness, not merely infinitesimal rigidity. Finally, 

sc =

 n − r + 1 4



=

 13 − 5 + 1 4



= 3 .

At degree three, four independent separator rows can be cho-sen and the remaining nine rows split into groups of sizes four and five, with one group reflected across the separator span, producing generic nonuniqueness. Thus the degree-three construction supplies the upper side of the exact thresh-old in this fixed rank-five cell. 

P002: Universal mixed-term lower bound Problem. Consider finite-dimensional centralized compos-ite minimization Φ = F + r. The function F is differen-tiable, possibly nonconvex, and has L-Lipschitz gradient; r

is proper, closed, and convex, and its proximal mapping is available exactly without stochastic-gradient cost. Assume that Φ is bounded below, that an initial point x0 is given, and that 

Φ( x0) − inf Φ ≤ ∆.

The regularizer must be genuinely nonsmooth: there must be a z ∈ dom ∂r and distinct u, v ∈ ∂r (z).Fix 

p = 32 , c = L = σ = ρ = ∆ = 1 , η = cL = 1 .

At any point x, a one-point oracle query draws a fresh seed ξ,returns g(x, ξ ), and costs one response. A paired query at x, y 

draws one fresh seed and returns both g(x, ξ ) and g(y, ξ ),at a cost of two responses. Conditionally on the transcript, distinct fresh seeds are independent, seed reuse is permitted only within such a declared pair, and 

E[g(x, ξ ) | transcript ] = ∇F (x),

sup 

> x

E∥g(x, ξ ) − ∇ F (x)∥3/2 ≤ 1

E[ ∥g(x, ξ ) − g(y, ξ )

− (∇F (x) − ∇ F (y)) ∥2 transcript  ≤ ∥ x − y∥2.

A finite marginal second moment at a single point is not assumed. An algorithm may be any adaptive randomized centralized algorithm. It is given ε, x 0, the declared parameter bounds, and exact proximal access to r, but it is not given the hidden instance, F , or the noise law. No zero-respecting, span, or analogous restriction is imposed. After a finite charged tran-script it declares a random output X, whose stationarity is measured by 

Gη (x) = η−1 x − prox ηr (x − η∇F (x)) .

For 0 < ε ≤ 1/16 , let Nall (ε) be the infimum, over all such algorithms that satisfy E∥Gη (X)∥ ≤ ε uniformly on the complete normalized instance class, of their smallest almost-sure charged-response cap. Decide whether there are constants κ > 0 and ε0 ∈

(0 , 1/16] such that 

Nall (ε) ≥ κ ε −7/2 (0 < ε ≤ ε0).

P003: Rank-two attainment on the BDCA fiber Problem. Let (a, b, c ) be the unique positive real triple sat-isfying 1414213 10 6 < a < 1414214 10 6 ,

1601231 10 6 < b < 1601232 10 6 ,

3005144 10 6 < c < 3005145 10 6

and 

a2 = 2 , b2 + ab − 2 − 2a = 0 , c2 = 2 a + 2 b + 3 .

Fix the ordered four-step schedule 

hbdca = ( b, 3/2, c, a ).

For any positive finite integer d, any L, D > 0, and any convex, differentiable, L-smooth function f : Rd → R hav-ing a minimizer x⋆, start from a point satisfying ∥x0 −x⋆∥ ≤ 

D and perform 

xt+1 = xt − ht

L ∇f (xt), 0 ≤ t < 4.

Write 

E4 = f (x4) − f (x⋆)

LD 2 , qbdca = W4(hbdca ) = sup E4,

where the supremum is over every admissible instance in every positive finite dimension; attainment is not assumed in this definition. Decide whether both 

977 25000 < q bdca < 391 10000 

and the following attainment assertion hold: there is an ad-missible instance of dimension d ≤ 2 for which E4 = qbdca .Only this fixed four-step interpolation fiber is in scope. The problem does not ask for the global four-step minimax value, comparison with shorter horizons, the scalar worst-case value, or a classification of all extremizers. 

P004: One-coordinate memory under binary delays Problem. Consider two agents, two communication phases, and delays in {0, 1}. At round k, the row-stochastic ma-trix A(k) and the column-stochastic matrix B(k) are two-periodic (not necessarily of fundamental period two), have positive diagonal entries, and have every positive entry at least 1/2. The unions over a period of the supports of A

and B are separately strongly connected. A directed nonself edge (j, i ) is active exactly when Aij (k) > 0 or Bij (k) > 0.Each active edge delivers, before the state update, exactly one packet 

pj (k − dji (k)) ,pj (t) = ( xj (t), y j (t)) ,dji (k) ∈ { 0, 1}

with a common age when both weights are positive. The ages are two-periodic, the receiver does not observe them, distinct-edge deliveries commute, and an inactive edge retains its previous packet. Agent i minimizes 

fi(x) = 12 (x − ri)2,

so the common target is x⋆ = ( r1 + r2)/2. Its persistent node state is exactly xi(k), y i(k). For each possible incom-ing nonself edge it also has one two-dimensional overwrite register bji (k), containing the most recent delivered packet, and one auxiliary scalar uji (k). No other persistent node, edge, global, clock, counter, or controller state is allowed, and packets contain no timestamp, generation index, delay label, or metadata. The phase, current incident weights, and current edge activity may be observed transiently. A protocol π1 is chosen before the schedule, centers, ini-tialization, and stepsize are known. In each phase, xi(k + 1) 

may be any deterministic linear function of xi(k), y i(k)

and the current incoming bji (k), u ji (k). After ∆gi(k) = 

xi(k + 1) − xi(k) is formed, the joint update of yi(k + 1) 

and the incoming auxiliary coordinates may be any deter-ministic local linear function of 

xi(k), y i(k), x i(k + 1) , ∆gi(k),

and all current incoming bji (k), u ji (k).

Coefficients may depend on the agent, edge, phase, step-size, and current incident entries of A(k), B (k), but not on the centers, realized delay labels, undeclared history, future data, or the complete schedule. On zero-delay schedules the law must preserve P 

> i

yi(k) = P 

> i

∇fi(xi(k)) from tracker-consistent initialization and must preserve every common-optimizer fixed trajectory. For k = −1, 0, initialize 

xi(k) = x0 

> i

, yi(k) = x0 

> i

− ri, pi(k) = ( x0 

> i

, y i(k)) ,

and set bji (0) = pj (0) and uji (0) = 0 . Let z(k) collect ev-ery declared persistent coordinate immediately after round-k

deliveries and before the update. Say that π1 has the required property if there is ¯α > 0 such that, for each α ∈ (0 , ¯α), con-stants Cα < ∞ and ρα ∈ (0 , 1) exist which are independent of the schedule, centers, initialization, and time, and every admissible execution has an exact two-periodic limiting or-bit z∞ with all primal coordinates equal to x⋆, all tracker coordinates zero, and 

∥z(k) − z∞(k mod 2) ∥2,

≤ Cαρkα,

∥z(0) − z∞(0) ∥2,k ≥ 0.

This estimate applies to all overwrite and auxiliary registers as well. Decide whether such a protocol π1 exists for the complete union-active schedule class, including schedules of funda-mental period one. Equivalently, is one auxiliary real coordi-nate per possible directed nonself edge sufficient for uniform exact linear convergence? 

P005: Harmonic metric drift in split FRB Problem. Let H be a separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert space. Let A : H ⇒ H be a nonzero lin-ear maximally monotone operator and B : H → H anonzero bounded linear monotone L-Lipschitz operator, with 

zer( A+B) = {0}. Let Mk be bounded self-adjoint operators satisfying 

mI ≼ Mk ≼ M I 

for fixed 0 < m ≤ M < ∞, and suppose Mkx → M∞x for every x ∈ H. Define the canonical two-sided metric drift by 

δk = inf δ ≥ 0 : (1 + δ)−1Mk ≼ Mk+1 ≼ (1 + δ)Mk .

It is essential that this be the least admissible drift, rather than a freely chosen Loewner envelope. Assume that for some 0 < c ≤ C < ∞ and all sufficiently large k,

ck + 1 ≤ δk ≤ Ck + 1 .

Thus (δk) ∈ ℓp for every p > 1, but (δk) /∈ ℓ1.Choose 0 < λ < m/ (2 L). An inexact variable-metric forward-reflected-backward orbit consists of an initial pair and sequences (xk), (ak+1 ), (rk+1 ) satisfying 

ak+1 ∈ Ax k+1 ,rk+1 = Mk(xk − xk+1 ),

−λ ak+1 + 2 Bx k − Bx k−1

.

When xk+1 ̸ = xk, define the realized relative residual 

εk = ∥rk+1 ∥M −1

> k

∥xk+1 − xk∥Mk

,and when xk+1 = xk, require rk+1 = 0 and set εk = 0 .Assume P 

> k

εk < ∞, while rk+1 ̸ = 0 for infinitely many k.The same datum must satisfy two global controls. First, for the same A, B, λ, M ∞, the exact fixed-M∞ FRB orbit converges strongly to 0 for every initial pair. Second, for the same A, metrics, and λ, deleting B and setting every residual to zero produces a variable-metric proximal orbit which converges strongly to 0 for every initial pair. Along the selected split orbit there must additionally be cB > 0

such that 

∥Bx k∥ ≥ cB ∥xk∥

eventually, and the selected ak+1 must be nonzero infinitely often. These clauses prevent either operator from being only nominally present. Decide whether one complete datum satisfying all of the preceding conditions can have 

xk ⇀ 0 but lim sup 

> k→∞

∥xk∥ > 0.

P006: Rank-six graph comparison cells Problem. Let G be a finite simple graph with at most eight vertices and tw( G) ≤ 5, equivalently, a partial 5-tree. Its Euclidean dimension ed( G) is the least k ≥ 1 such that every finite-dimensional real vector configuration indexed by 

V (G) can be replaced by one in Rk preserving every edge distance. Its Gram dimension gd( G) is defined similarly, but the replacement must preserve every squared norm and every edge inner product. Let C(G) be the relevant cone of graph-supported positive semidefinite matrices. A matrix M ∈ C (G) has the full-annihilation property if the only X ∈ S|V (G)| satisfying 

M X = 0 ,Xii = 0 (i ∈ V (G)) ,Xij = 0 (ij ∈ E(G)) 

is X = 0 . Define bν(G) to be the maximum corank of a matrix in C(G) having this property. Decide whether every such graph satisfying gd( G) = 6 

must satisfy both 

ed( G) = 5 and bν(G) = 6 .

The two equalities are independent obligations and may not be inferred from one another. 

P007: Critical-channel localization boundary Problem. Fix u ∈ (0 , 1] . On R, with base point 0, parameter 

λ = 1 , and centers y ∈ [−u, u ], consider the Legendre kernels 

ϕ0(x) = x2

2 ,ϕk(x) = k−3x2

2 ,

+(1 − k−3)k2 logcosh( x/k ), k ≥ 1

and their Bregman divergences 

Dϕk (x, y ) = ϕk(x) − ϕk(y) − ϕ′

> k

(y)( x − y).

For an objective f , put 

Hk,y (x) = f (x) + Dϕk (x, y ).

The kernels are understood after affine normalization at the base point; they and their gradients converge uniformly on compact sets to ϕ0 and ϕ′

> 0

. Each kernel is supercoercive, and the scoped objectives must be proper, lower semicontinuous, finite and relatively prox-regular at 0 for 0, with 0 ∈ ∂f (0) 

and relative prox-boundedness threshold strictly larger than 

1 for every k.Define 

α = (3 /2) 1/4,c0 = 4α

3 ,bc(u) = 

r 23



1 − u3

3



,

+

r 32 log 2 .

For d ∈ R, let Fcrit (u, d ) consist of all even C2 functions 

f : R → R such that 

f (x) = 0 (|x| ≤ 1) ,f (x) = −c0|x|5/4 + u|x| + bc(u)|x|1/2 + d, 

(|x| ≥ 2) .

No condition is imposed on the interpolation region 1 <

|x| < 2 beyond membership in this class. For f ∈ F crit (u, d ), set 

mu(f ) = min 

> x∈R



f (x) + (x − u)2

2



,

Γ( u, d ) = d + u2

2 − 4u5

45 ,

∆( u, d, f ) = Γ( u, d ) − mu(f ),q(u) = 32 log 2 − 1 + u3

3 ,L(u) = log 2 − 2u3

9 − q(u)2

3 ,

and define the positive tail-channel energy 

Tk(u) = inf  

> x≥k3

Hk,u (x).

For τ > 0, write 

Nk,y (τ ) = 

n

x : Hk,y (x) ≤ inf  

> w

Hk,y (w) + τ

o

.

Uniform boundedness of either exact minimizers or τ -near-minimizers always means one radius valid simultaneously for every integer k ≥ 1 and every y ∈ [−u, u ]. Its failure means that every proposed radius is exceeded by a member of this joint family. Decide whether the following complete critical-channel classification holds for every u ∈ (0 , 1] , d ∈ R, and f ∈Fcrit (u, d ).First, L(u) > 0, and as k → ∞ through positive integers, 

Tk(u) = Γ( u, d ) + L(u)

k + o(k−1).Moreover, every choice 

xk ∈ argmin 

> x≥k3

Hk,u (x)

satisfies 

xk = 23 k4 − 43 q(u)k + o(k).

Second, if ∆( u, d, f ) < 0, then every sequence zk ∈

argmin Hk,u satisfies |zk| → ∞ , and 

inf  

> x

Hk,u (x) −→ Γ( u, d ).

If ∆( u, d, f ) ≥ 0, there is instead a radius Rexact =

Rexact (u, d, f ) such that 

|z| ≤ Rexact ,

for every k ≥ 1, y ∈ [−u, u ],z ∈ argmin Hk,y .

Third, when ∆( u, d, f ) > 0, every fixed 0 < τ <

∆( u, d, f ) admits a joint bound 

Nk,y (τ ) ⊆ [−Rτ , R τ ] (k ≥ 1, y ∈ [−u, u ]) 

for some Rτ = Rτ (u, d, f, τ ), whereas for every τ >

∆( u, d, f ) and every R > 0, some k ≥ 1, y ∈ [−u, u ],and x ∈ N k,y (τ ) satisfy |x| > R . No claim is made at the tolerance endpoint τ = ∆( u, d, f ). When ∆( u, d, f ) = 0 ,exact minimizers retain the joint bound above, but for every 

τ > 0 the τ -near-minimizer family is not uniformly bounded. Finally, the kernel family has no positive uniform lower-chord comparison with ϕ0: for every c > 0, there are k ≥ 1,

x ∈ R, and y ∈ [−u, u ] such that 

Dϕk (x, y ) < cD ϕ0 (x, y ).

P008: Universal two-partition floor Problem. Let x1, . . . , x 10 ∈ R2 be distinct points, in the displayed cyclic order, which are all vertices of their convex hull, and assume that no three are collinear. Partition [10] into color classes C1, C 2, C 3, C 4 of sizes 3, 3, 3, 1, respectively. A candidate partition is an unordered collection of four nonempty, pairwise disjoint blocks whose union is [10] . It is 

rainbow if each block contains at most one index from each color class. Let R(X, C) be the set of rainbow candidates for which the four closed convex hulls of the corresponding point blocks have a nonempty common intersection, and put 

T (X, C) = |R (X, C)|.

The blocks are unordered: permuting them or choosing a different common point does not create a new partition. The convex hulls are closed, so the common point may lie on a boundary and barycentric coefficients may vanish. Decide whether 

T (X, C) ≥ 2

for every configuration and coloring satisfying these con-ditions, including diagonal-concurrence and boundary-intersection cases. Sharpness is supplied by the fixed rational configuration 

(t⋆

> 1

, . . . , t ⋆

> 10

),

= ( −8, −5, −3, −1, 0, 2, 4, 7, 11 , 16) ,x⋆j = ( t⋆j , (t⋆j )2)

with C⋆ 

> 1

= {2, 4, 9}, C⋆ 

> 2

= {3, 5, 8}, ,C⋆ 

> 3

= {6, 7, 10 }, C⋆ 

> 4

= {1}.

For this input an independently checked exact certificate gives precisely the two feasible partitions 

A = {{ 1, 5, 9}, {2, 6, 8}, {3, 7}, {4, 10 }} ,

B = {{ 1, 4, 8}, {2, 7}, {3, 6, 9}, {5, 10 }} .

This equality is evidence only for sharpness and may not be used as a premise for the universal lower bound. Together with that lower bound, the certificate would determine the universal minimum as two. 

P009: Sampled-information exit exponent Problem. Fix T > 0, σ > 0, and U > σ 2. Starting from 

X0 = 0 , consider the stopped controlled Jacobi diffusion 

dX t = ut dt + σ

q

1 − X2 

> t

dW t,τ = inf {t ≥ 0 : |Xt| = 1 }.

The unique-in-law weak solution is absorbed once τ occurs, and safety failure is the endpoint-inclusive event {τ ≤ T }.The continuous-information comparator permits arbitrary progressively measurable controls with |ut| ≤ U , including the Markov feedback ut = −U X t. For a mesh ∆ = T /N ,

N ∈ N, a sampled policy observes the exact state only at k∆

and holds 

ut = ak on [k∆, (k + 1)∆) .

Here ak ∈ [−U, U ] may be any Borel function of the entire sampled-state history and of private randomization indepen-dent of the Brownian motion. Let 

p∆ = inf  

> all such sampled policies

P(τ ≤ T ).

The infimum is over the full history-dependent randomized class, not merely Markov or sign policies. The constrained cost is the unit exit penalty, so whenever the continuous feedback has zero exit probability the continuous-versus-sampled value gap equals p∆.Decide whether, for every choice of the fixed parameters above, all three claims 

P ut=−U X t (τ ≤ T ) = 0 , p∆ > 0 (N ≥ 1) ,

and 

lim  

> N→∞



− TN log pT /N 



= π2

8σ2

hold. The limit is required along the full integer sequence, not a selected subsequence. 

P010: Dyadic extremal coloring Problem. Let 

D2 = t ∈ R10 : t1 > 0, tk+1 ≥ 2tk (1 ≤ k ≤ 9) ,

and for t ∈ D 2 set 

xj (t) = ( tj , t 2 

> j

), X(t) = ( x1(t), . . . , x 10 (t)) .These are ten distinct vertices of a strictly convex planar decagon in the displayed order. Fix the coloring 

C⋆ 

> 1

= {2, 5, 8}, ,C⋆ 

> 2

= {3, 6, 9}, ,C⋆ 

> 3

= {4, 7, 10 }, ,C⋆ 

> 4

= {1}.

A partition is an unordered collection of four nonempty disjoint blocks covering [10] . It is rainbow if each block meets each color class in at most one index, and it is a Tverberg partition if the four closed convex hulls of its point blocks have a nonempty common intersection. Zero barycentric co-efficients are allowed, and neither a permutation of the blocks nor another choice of common point creates a new partition. Let R⋆(t) denote the family of all such rainbow Tverberg partitions. Consider 

A = {{ 1, 5, 9}, {2, 6, 10 }, {3, 7}, {4, 8}} ,

B = {{ 1, 6, 8}, {2, 7}, {3, 5, 10 }, {4, 9}} .

Decide whether the exact family identity 

R⋆(t) = {A , B} 

holds for every t ∈ D 2, equivalently whether the number of unordered rainbow Tverberg partitions is uniformly equal to two throughout the closed dyadic cone. The problem is restricted to the stated coloring and the closed dyadic cone; it makes no claim about other colorings, ratios below two, or arbitrary strictly convex decagons. 

P011: Sharp permutation margin Problem. For a fixed four-step schedule h =(h0, h 1, h 2, h 3), chosen before any gradients are observed, apply gradient descent to an arbitrary convex, differentiable, 

L-smooth function f : Rm → R:

xt+1 = xt − ht

L ∇f (xt), 0 ≤ t < 4.

Here m is any positive finite integer, f has a minimizer x⋆,and ∥x0 − x⋆∥ ≤ D. No momentum, memory, line search, or adaptivity is allowed. Define 

W4(h) = sup f (x4) − f (x⋆)

LD 2 ,

where the supremum is over all admissible data and all pos-itive finite dimensions, without assuming attainment. Let (a, b, c, bp) be the unique positive real tuple in the ra-tional box ,

1414213 10 6 < a < 1414214 10 6 ,

1601231 10 6 < b < 1601232 10 6 ,

3005144 10 6 < c < 3005145 10 6 ,

31169778960345 10 15 < bp <, 

31169778960346 10 15 ,

satisfying 

a2 = 2 ,b2 + ab − 2 − 2a = 0 ,c2 = 2 a + 2 b + 3 ,

2bp(c + 1) 2 = 1 .

Let W be the 24 words obtained by permuting the distinct let-ters a, b, c, d , and associate with each word the schedule ob-tained by replacing d with 3/2. Thus hbdca = ( b, 3/2, c, a ).Remove the two words 

E0 = {abcd, bacd }, Operm = W \ E0,

and define 

γ(w) = W4(hw) − bp, ∆perm = min 

> w∈O perm

γ(w),

Aperm = {w ∈ O perm : γ(w) = ∆ perm }.

Decide whether 

39 5000 < ∆perm < 1125 and Aperm = {bdca }.

The question is restricted to this 24-schedule orbit and makes no claim about the global minimax value over R4.

P012: Short-period supercritical orbits Problem. For δ ∈ (8 , 41 /5] , consider the two-player game on [−1, 1] 2 with payoffs 

u1(x, y ) = − x2

2 − (1 + δ)xy, u2(x, y ) = − y2

2 + xy. 

Writing z = ( x, y ), define 

Fδ (z) = ( x + (1 + δ)y, y − x)

and let ΠK be coordinatewise clipping onto K = [ −1, 1] 2.From an arbitrary history z(−1) , z (0) ∈ K, the simultane-ous exact-gradient recurrence is 

z(t + 1) = Π K



z(t) − 25 Fδ (z(t)) + 15 Fδ (z(t − 1)) 



.

Equivalently, on the compact history space H = K × K,

Φδ (z0, z −1) = 



ΠK



z0 − 25 Fδ (z0) + 15 Fδ (z−1)



, z 0



.

A history has least period p if Φpδ (h) = h and Φjδ (h)̸ = h for 

1 ≤ j < p .Define the equilibrium orbit 

Q0 = {((0 , 0) , (0 , 0)) }.

For the fully clipped cycle, extend periodically 

a0 = (1 , −1/3) , a1 = (1 , 1/3) , ,a2 = ( −1, 1/3) , a3 = ( −1, −1/3) 

and set QA = {(ar , a r−1) : r ∈ Z4}. For the mixed clipped-interior cycle, extend periodically 

s0 = (1 , −1/6) , s1 = (1 /2, 1/3) , ,s2 = ( −1, 1/6) , s3 = ( −1/2, −1/3) and set QS = {(sr , s r−1) : r ∈ Z4}.Decide whether, for every δ ∈ (8 , 41 /5] , every periodic point of Φδ with least period at most eight belongs to 

Q0 ∪ QA ∪ QS .

If so, the only least periods at most eight are one and four. The classification must use exact coordinatewise clipping, including equality on clipping boundaries. It must cover ev-ery feasible lower-clipped, interior, and upper-clipped word of length at most eight, solve its affine periodicity equations, check the corresponding inequalities uniformly throughout the parameter interval, and remove repetitions and phase shifts before assigning least period. Local multipliers of the three displayed orbits alone are not sufficient. No claim is made about periods above eight, nonperi-odic recurrence, basins, empirical measures, or regret con-vergence. 

P013: Subdyadic two-partition threshold Problem. For ρ > 1, let 

Dρ = {t ∈ R10 : t1 > 0, t k+1 ≥ ρt k for 1 ≤ k ≤ 9},

and set xj (t) = ( tj , t 2 

> j

) and X(t) = ( x1(t), . . . , x 10 (t)) .Partition [10] into four color classes of sizes 3, 3, 3, 1. A can-didate is an unordered collection of four nonempty pairwise disjoint blocks covering [10] ; it is rainbow when each block meets each color class at most once. Let T (X(t), C) be the number of such candidates whose four closed point-block convex hulls have a nonempty common intersection. Block permutations are identified and zero barycentric coefficients are allowed. Let PT (ρ) mean that 

T (X(t), C) ≥ 2

for every t ∈ D ρ and every permitted coloring, and define 

ρT = inf {ρ > 1 : PT (ρ)}.

The domains are nested: Dρ2 ⊆ D ρ1 whenever ρ2 ≥ ρ1.An independently checked exact certificate establishes the dyadic endpoint PT (2) .Decide whether 

ρT < 2.

The problem concerns only positive parabola sequences in the nested stretch domains. It does not extend to arbitrary strictly convex decagons; boundary ratios, boundary hull in-tersections, and counting modulo block permutations remain in scope. 

P014: Robust stepsize boundary for push–pull tracking Problem. Fix 0 < a ≤ 1/2 and constant matrices 

A =

1 − u uv 1 − v



,C =

1 − r sr 1 − s



,u, v, r, s ∈ [a, 1 − a].

Thus A is row-stochastic, C is column-stochastic, and both have complete positive off-diagonal support. Consider two scalar agents with 

fi(x) = x2

2 + bix + ci, bi, c i ∈ R,

whose optimizer is x⋆ = −(b1 + b2)/2. Communication is immediate and uncompressed. Starting from arbitrary x0 ∈

R2, initialize y0 = x0+b and run constant-stepsize push–pull tracking. With zk = ( xk, y k) ∈ R4, its linear state equation is 

zk+1 = T z k, T =

 A −αI A − I C − αI 



.

Define 

Ek =

> 2

X

> i=1

|xki −x⋆|2+

> 2

X

> i=1

|yki |2+ X

> i

yki − X

> i

(xki + bi)

> 2

,

and let Pbox (a, α ) mean that Ek → 0 for every admissible weight quadruple, every b, c ∈ R2, and every initial x0. The characteristic polynomial factors as 

det( λI − T ) = ( λ − 1) p(λ),,p(λ) = λ3 + β2λ2 + β1λ + β0

where 

β2 = 2 α + r + s + u + v − 3,β1 = α2 + α(r + s + u + v − 4) + ru + rv − 2r

+ su + sv − 2s − 2u − 2v + 3 ,β0 = − α2 + α(2 ru − r + 2 sv − s − u − v + 2) 

− ru − rv + r − su − sv + s + u + v − 1.

Decide whether, for every 0 < a ≤ 1/2 and 0 < α ≤ 1,

Pbox (a, α ) ⇐⇒ 0 < α < 2a2.

P015: Gaussian envelope for exit-risk sensitivity Problem. Consider the open unit ball D ⊂ Rd, a fixed 

x0 ∈ D, identity diffusion, and a horizon T = N ∆, where 

N ≥ 1 is finite and 0 < ∆ ≤ H ≤ T . The state coefficients and compact control set satisfy the usual boundedness and uniform state-Lipschitz conditions ensuring a unique strong solution up to the exit time τD . Bounded continuous running, terminal, and exit costs define a fixed H-horizon stopped problem. It is stipulated that this problem has a Borel time-zero minimizing selector μH ; deterministic tie-breaking and a fixed boundary action extend it to D.At the sampling time k∆, an adversarial observation error 

Ek is measurable with respect to the completed pre-decision history generated by X0, the Brownian path through k∆,and the earlier errors. It satisfies ∥Ek∥ ≤ η. The controller observes 

Yk = Xk∆ + Ek

and holds 

ut = μH (Π D (Yk)) , t ∈ [k∆, (k + 1)∆) ∩ [0 , T ],until exit, where ΠD is Euclidean projection onto the closed unit ball. After exit a fixed cemetery action is used. For exact observations, the same held controller has the pointwise certificate 

Px0 (τD ≤ T ) ≤ α − s, α ∈ (0 , 1) , s > 0.

No uniform safety certificate over other initial or replanning states is assumed. Write 

¯b(x, z ) = b(x, μ H (z)) , x ∈ D, z ∈ D, 

and assume that for some finite Ly ≥ 0,

∥¯b(x, z ) − ¯b(x, z ′)∥ ≤ Ly ∥z − z′∥

globally in x, z, z ′. Let 

F (η) = sup  

> authorized history-dependent
> ∥Ek∥≤ η

Px0 (τD ≤ T )

be the worst-case exit risk. With Φ the standard normal dis-tribution function, define 

G(q) = 2Φ( q/ 2) − 1

and the classwise modulus 

M(q) = ,

sup F (η′) − F (η) : ,

0 ≤ η ≤ η′,Ly

√T (η′ − η) ≤ q

where the outer supremum ranges over all scoped instances. Coefficient bounds need be finite for each instance but need not be uniform along a sharpness sequence. Finally set 

ηc = sup {η ≥ 0 : F (η) ≤ α}.

Decide whether the exact classwise identity 

M(q) = G(q) = 2Φ( q/ 2) − 1, q ≥ 0,

holds. In particular, does every individual instance satisfy 

0 ≤ F (η′) − F (η) ≤ G



Ly

√T (η′ − η)



?

P016: Second-epi criterion for PL transfer Problem. In R2, let S = [ −1, 1] 2, f (z) = dist( z, S )2, and 

T = {z : dist( z, S ) < 1/4}.

Let p ∈ Q[x, y ] have degree at most six and satisfy through-out T|p| ≤ 1128 , ∥∇ p∥ ≤ 1128 , ∥∇ 2p∥op ≤ 18 .

Set Fp = f + p,

vp = min  

> T

Fp,Mp = {z ∈ T : Fp(z) = vp},Kp = {z ∈ T : ∇Fp(z) = 0 }.

The bounds ensure that Mp is nonempty and lies in the interior of T . Let ∆p be the distance from vp to the set of higher stationary values {Fp(z) : z ∈ Kp, F p(z) > v p},with ∆p = ∞ if that set is empty. Also put 

bp = min  

> z∈∂T

(Fp(z) − vp),λp = 14 min {∆p, b p},

Ωp = {z ∈ T : Fp(z) < v p + λp}.

For m ∈ Mp, let TMp (m) be the Bouligand tangent cone and define 

d2Fp(m | 0)( w) = lim inf 

> t↓0
> w′→w

2( Fp(m + tw ′) − Fp(m)) 

t2 .

Consider the transverse second-epi condition 

∃μ > 0 such that 

d2Fp(m | 0)( w) ≥

μ dist  w, T Mp (m)2,m ∈ Mp, w ∈ R2.

(Q) and the ambient condition that constants c > 0 and C < ∞

exist such that every z ∈ Ωp satisfies 

c dist( z, M p)2 ≤ Fp(z) − vp,

dist( z, M p) ≤ C∥∇ Fp(z)∥,Fp(z) − vp ≤ C∥∇ Fp(z)∥2.

(E) Decide whether (Q) and (E) are equivalent for every ad-missible rational polynomial p. The stationary values, bp, λ p,and Ωp must be computed from the complete piecewise-polynomial function before either predicate is tested. Both predicates refer to the full minimum set, including corners, boundary segments, crossings, multiple components, and ap-proaches across projection-cell seams. 

P017: Robust-instability tongue Problem. For ϕ ∈ [0 , π/ 2] , let 

M0 = diag(1 , 4) , M1(ϕ) = R(ϕ) diag(1 , 4) R(ϕ)T,

where R(ϕ) is the planar rotation matrix, and define 

Ti(ϕ) =  Mi(ϕ) + 45 I−1

·  Mi(ϕ) − 45 I,Di(ϕ) = I − Ti(ϕ).

For η ∈ [0 , 1] , the allowed phase-i images of x are 

Fϕ,η i (x) = 



Ti(ϕ)x + r :

rTMi(ϕ)r ≤ η2xTDi(ϕ)T

Mi(ϕ)Di(ϕ)x

 .

The error may depend on the realized state and the entire preceding history. For either starting phase σ ∈ { 0, 1}, an admissible trajectory satisfies 

xk+1 ∈ F ϕ,η 

> (σ+k) mod 2

(xk), k ≥ 0.Define the worst two-step asymptotic amplification 

R(ϕ, η ) = max  

> σ∈{ 0,1}

lim sup 

> n→∞

 sup    

> x0̸=0
> admissible (xk)

∥x2n∥2

∥x0∥2



> 1/n

.

This is the complete adaptive trajectory family; no fixed-direction, stationary-error, or periodic-error restriction is al-lowed. Let 

ηmid =

s

1639 256 − 375 √2128 − 3256 

q

339569 − 230500 √2.

Decide whether there is a unique continuous curve ηc :[0 , π/ 2] → (0 , 1] and a unique ϕmin ∈ (3 /4, 39 /50) such that ηc is strictly decreasing on [0 , ϕ min ], strictly increasing on [ϕmin , π/ 2] , and 

ηc(0) = 1 ,ηc(π/ 4) = ηmid ,

9449 10000 < η c(ϕmin ) < 23623 25000 .

The curve must be the exact stability boundary: 

R(ϕ, η )



< 1, η < η c(ϕ),

= 1 , η = ηc(ϕ),> 1, η > η c(ϕ).

For each fixed ϕ, the entire adaptive family at criticality must be power bounded: some Cϕ < ∞ must satisfy 

∥xk∥2 ≤ Cϕ∥x0∥2

for both starting phases, every nonzero initial state, every admissible error history, and all k. At the same time, at least one nonzero critical trajectory must be nondecaying: 

inf k ∥xk∥2 > 0.Below the curve, the required conclusion is a per-iterate 

R-linear estimate uniform over phases, states, and adaptive errors; above it, strict instability requires one coherent infinite unbounded trajectory, not merely a finite product of norm greater than one. The equality set must be proved to be exactly one strictly unimodal graph, ruling out plateaus, secondary tongues, and active-branch switches. 

P018: Ten-atom separator threshold Problem. Consider two running-intersection cliques 

CL = {z1, z 2, z 3} ∪ U, CR = {z1, z 2, z 3} ∪ V, 

with disjoint finite private-variable sets U, V . Local poly-nomial constraints are compact and Archimedean, and the standard sparse Moment–SOS convention is used: at order t,moments have degree at most 2t, while a degree-d constraint has localizing order t − ⌈ d/ 2⌉. Clique moment blocks are positive semidefinite and flat, so their finite atomic represent-ing measures can be extracted. Shared moments are equated, but equality of the complete extracted separator measures is not assumed. A ten-point set S ⊂ R3 is quadratic-poised when evalua-tion 

P2(R3) −→ RS

is bijective. At relaxation order three, suppose each clique measure has ten atoms, has an injective projection to ten distinct quadratic-poised separator points, and satisfies 

rank M3 = rank M2 = 10 .

The two separator marginals therefore agree on every trivari-ate monomial of degree at most six. Decide whether these hypotheses force equality of the complete separator marginals and hence permit a finite global coupling supported on the full feasible set whose clique marginals are the extracted measures. For every clique-decomposed objective, this coupling should imply equality of the order-three sparse relaxation value ρ3 and the true op-timum f ⋆ 

> 3

. The argument may use only the shared degree-six moments; in particular, it must construct degree-at-most-three polynomials separating an alleged outside atom from a poised ten-point support, then recover the weights using quadratic Lagrange polynomials. The asserted threshold also includes sharpness at order two. Decide whether there exists a compact two-clique in-stance with degree-at-most-two local constraints, a linear clique-decomposed objective, a nonempty global feasible set, and flat blocks 

rank M2 = rank M1 = 10 ,

whose two positive ten-atomic separator marginals are dis-joint, quadratic-poised, and agree on all 35 trivariate mo-ments through degree four, yet satisfy the strict gap 

ρ2 < f ⋆ 

> 2

.

Such a witness must give exact or certifiably algebraic nodes and positive weights, verify disjointness and both 10 × 10 

quadratic evaluation determinants, and compute the sparse and true values separately. The problem asks whether both the universal order-three assertion and the existential order-two sharpness assertion hold. 

P019: Endpoint P0 diagonal faithfulness Problem. Work in R3. Let U be open and convex, let 

V ⋐ K ⊂ B ⋐ U , where K is a closed ball and B a closed axis-aligned box, and let hx(y) be a jointly C2 field of su-percoercive, very strictly convex Legendre kernels. On the common localization their y-Hessians have uniform positive lower and finite upper bounds, and their second derivatives are locally Lipschitz. Define 

D(x; y, z ) = hx(y) − hx(z) − ⟨∇ y hx(z), y − z⟩,G(x, y ) = ∇xD(x; y, x ), H(x) = ∇2 

> yy

hx(x),Fx(y) = −H(x)−1G(x, y ),A(x, y ) = Dy Fx(y) = −H(x)−1Dy G(x, y ).

Thus Fx(x) = 0 and A(x, x ) = I.Let f be proper, lower semicontinuous, prox-bounded, rel-atively prox-regular, and subdifferentially continuous on the localization, with stationarity interpreted using the limiting subdifferential. Choose λ > 0 below the common thresholds. For every x ∈ V , assume 

Qx(y) = f (y) + λ−1D(x; y, x )

has a unique exact minimizer p(x) over K, lying in int K,with uniform local quadratic growth and a uniform positive objective gap on ∂K . Put 

Mloc (x) = Qx(p(x)) .

The neighborhoods are fixed as part of the datum and may not be shrunk later to discard a critical center. Assume that some α > 0 satisfies, for every (x, y ) ∈

V × B, that all one-by-one and two-by-two principal minors of A(x, y ) are at least α, while 

det A(x, y ) ≥ 0.

This is the endpoint proper-P0 condition: the full determi-nant may vanish. Adding any jointly C2, x-dependent affine function of y to hx leaves all data and conclusions unchanged. Decide whether these assumptions always imply that Mloc 

is C1 on V , with 

∇Mloc (x) = λ−1G(x, p (x)) ,

and that 

∇Mloc (x) = 0 =⇒ 0 ∈ ∂f (x).

P020: Robust remote nonconvergence Problem. Consider three players on a triangle, each with mixed-action mean xi ∈ [−1, 1] , and payoff xi(Cρx)i, where 

Cρ =

0 1 + ρ −1

−1 0 11 −1 0

!

, |ρ| < 14 .

Starting from a finite two-state log-odds history (q−1, q 0) ∈

R6, all players use the exact recurrence 

xti = tanh( qti /2) ,qt+1 = qt + ηC ρ(2 xt − xt−1),t ≥ 0

with arbitrary constant η > 0.For each eigenvalue λ of Cρ, equivalently each root of 

λ3 + (3 + ρ)λ − ρ = 0 ,

let z range over the two roots of 

z2 − (1 + ηλ )z + ηλ 

2 = 0 ,

and define S(ρ, η ) as the maximum modulus of these six values. This quantity describes the joint local spectral effect of ρ and η. In the parameter box below, ρ < 0, and the Nash set in [−1, 1] 3 is {0}.Decide whether there is a single δ ∈ (0 , 1/100) such that, whenever 

|ρ + 1 /10 | ≤ δ, |η − 1/20 | ≤ δ, 

and every coordinate of both q−1 and q0 lies within δ of −10 ,the following two conclusions hold: 

S(ρ, η ) < 1 and lim sup 

> t→∞

∥xt∥2 > 0.

The same δ must work for the full two-parameter box and all six history coordinates. The second assertion is pointwise for every selected trajectory; no common positive separation constant, periodicity, or recurrence is required. 

P021: Worst reset-selector survival rate Problem. Let K = [ −1, 1] , U = {− 1/2, 1/2}, X0 = 0 ,and 

Xt+1 = Xt + ut + 14 Wt+1 ,

where the Wt are independent standard normal variables. The process exits at τ = inf {t ≥ 1 : Xt /∈ K}. For bounded Borel f , write 

Quf (x) = ,

E[f (X1)1{X1∈K} | X0 = x, u 0 = u],,V1(x) = max  

> u∈U

Qu1(x).

There are two planning stages, the running and terminal costs vanish, and the risk budget is reset after each safe transition. Thus every feasible plan is minimizing. Let the inward selector be μin (x) = 1 /2 for x < 0 and 

−1/2 for x ≥ 0, and set 

min = min  

> x∈K

Qμin (x)V1(x),mall = min  

> x∈K, u ∈U

QuV1(x),θmid = ( min + mall )/2, rmid = 1 − θmid .

At state x, the feasible first actions are 

Fmid (x) = {u ∈ U : QuV1(x) ≥ θmid }.

Membership means that the action can be completed by a one-step survival-maximizing tail satisfying the reset budget. Let Smid be all stationary Borel selectors μ(x) ∈ F mid (x).Define μg (x) to minimize Qu1(x) over the feasible actions, breaking ties in favor of −1/2.For μ ∈ S mid , put 

L−(μ) = lim inf   

> T→∞

,

Pμ(τ > T )1/T ,L+(μ) = lim sup  

> T→∞

,

Pμ(τ > T )1/T 

and λ− 

> mid

= inf μ∈S mid L−(μ). Decide whether the root limit 

Lg = lim   

> T→∞

Pμg (τ > T )1/T 

exists and satisfies 

λ− 

> mid

= Lg < L −(μin ).

The statement includes mall < m in , nonempty feasible sec-tions with Borel graph, extension of every selector to a fea-sible two-step plan, and recursive feasibility before exit. Ex-tremality must be proved against every Borel selector, ac-counting for its quasi-stationary distribution; pointwise one-step leakage inequalities are insufficient. P022: Saddle accumulation under kernel convergence Problem. Work in dimension two. Fix compact parameter sets U ⋐ U+, P ⋐ P+, a compact localization set W , and a common open neighborhood N ⊃ W ∪ U+. Let hk, h be 

C2 Legendre kernels satisfying, uniformly on N ,

mI ≼ ∇2hk, ∇2h ≼ M I, ,εk := sup 

> N

∥∇ 2hk − ∇ 2h∥ → 0.

After subtracting affine functions, assume hk → h in C1(N ),and define the affine-gauge-invariant error 

ηk = inf  

> a∈R2

sup 

> z∈N

∥∇ hk(z) − ∇ h(z) − a∥.

Fix one proper lower-semicontinuous, prox-bounded, uni-formly prox-regular objective F⋆. For (x, p ) ∈ U+ × P+,let 

qk(x, p ; y) = F⋆(y) − ⟨ p, y ⟩ + λ−1Dhk (y, x ),

with q defined using h. Suppose q(x, p ; ·) has a κ-Lipschitz branch T (x, p ) of strong local minimizers, and that fixed constants R, c > 0 give, throughout the closed R-ball, 

q(x, p ; y) ≥ q(x, p ; T (x, p )) + c∥y − T (x, p )∥2,

with T (x, p ) the only local minimizer there and the ball con-tained in int W . No uniqueness or convergence is assumed for the perturbed minima. For 0 < r < R , let Lrk(x, p ) be all strong local minimizers of qk(x, p ; ·) at distance less than r from T (x, p ). Decide whether there always exist one r ∈ (0 , R ), Cdisp < ∞, and 

K such that, for all k ≥ K and (x, p ) ∈ U × P , Lrk(x, p ) is a singleton {Tk(x, p )} and 

∥Tk(x, p ) − T (x, p )∥ ≤ Cdisp ηk.

The radius and constants are uniform in x, p , and the con-clusion concerns strong local minima, not global minimizers over W .

P023: Newton formula near a minimum sphere Problem. In R4, let 

S = {z : ∥z∥ = 1 },f (z) = ( ∥z∥2 − 1) 2,q0 = (0 , 0, 0, 1) 

and work in the tube |∥ z∥ − 1| < 1/8. Let Q ∈ Q[u, v, w ]

have degree at most ten, Q(0) = 0 , and ∇Q(0) = 0 . With 

EQ = uQ u + vQ v + wQ w,

choose a positive rational α and define 

pα,Q (z) = α



Q(z1, z 2, z 3) − ∥z∥2 − 12 EQ(z1, z 2, z 3)



.

Assume on the tube that both ∥∇ pα,Q ∥ and ∥∇ 2pα,Q ∥op are at most 1/6400 . The correction makes the radial derivative vanish on S, and the radial minimum is uniquely r = 1 ;hence the north-chart reduced germ of Fα,Q = f + pα,Q is exactly αQ .Assume that 0 is a strict isolated local minimum of Q,that Q is convenient, and that for every nonempty coordinate set I ⊆ { u, v, w }, every compact face polynomial of the Newton polyhedron of the restriction QI has no critical point on (R \ { 0})I . For each compact facet Γ, write its supporting hyperplane as X

> j∈I

νj

aΓ,j 

= 1 

with positive intercepts, and let Mstr (Q) be the maximum of all aΓ,j over all coordinate restrictions and compact facets. Set 

θstr (Q) = 1 − 1

Mstr (Q) .

Let θred (Q) be the optimal local exponent in 

Q(ξ)θ ≤ C∥∇ Q(ξ)∥

near 0 on Q > 0, and let θamb (α, Q ) be the analogous optimal exponent for 

(Fα,Q (z) − Fα,Q (q0)) θ ≤ C∥∇ Fα,Q (z)∥

near q0 on the positive level set. Decide whether every admissible pair satisfies 

θamb (α, Q ) = θred (Q) = θstr (Q).

The assertion also requires a terminating exact procedure which verifies the strict-minimum and stratified nondegen-eracy conditions, computes Mstr (Q), and returns positive rational C, δ certifying the ambient inequality at the pre-dicted exponent without deleting coordinate strata or polar arcs. 

P024: One-hold diffusion crossing law Problem. In the open unit disk, start from x0 = ( r, 0) ,where 0 < r < 1/3, and let the diffusion be σe 2 dW t with 

σ > 0. Over the single holding interval [0 , 1] , the available drifts are 0 and −ae 1, with 0 < a < 1 + r. A stipulated time-zero selector chooses −ae 1 when the first coordinate of the projected observation is negative and 0 otherwise, including on the boundary. For 0 ≤ t ≤ 1, define 

qa(t) = r − at, ha(t) = p1 − qa(t)2,

and 

P (a) = P{∃ t ∈ [0 , 1] : |σW t| ≥ ha(t)}, P0 = P (0) .

Let Fa(η) be the supremum of the disk-exit probability over all authorized time-zero observation errors of Euclidean norm at most η, with Euclidean projection onto the closed disk. Given a nominal certificate P0 ≤ α − s, 0 < α < 1,

s > 0, define 

ηc(a, α ) = sup {η ≥ 0 : Fa(η) ≤ α}.

Decide whether the following three assertions hold for every r ∈ (0 , 1/3) and σ > 0. First, there is exactly one 

a⋆ ∈ (2 r, 1 + r) such that 

P (a) < P 0 (0 < a < a ⋆), P (a⋆) = P0, ,P (a) > P 0 (a⋆ < a < 1 + r).Second, for all a, η ,

Fa(η) = 

P0, 0 ≤ η ≤ r, 

max {P0, P (a)}, η > r. 

Third, ηc = ∞ when P (a) ≤ α, while when P (a) > α ,

ηc = r, Fa(r) = P0 ≤ α − s, 

lim  

> η↓r, η>r

Fa(η) = P (a) > α. 

P025: Small-noise feasible-horizon transition Problem. Let a hidden drift Θ ∈ {− a, a }, a > 0, have prior probabilities p0, 1 − p0. Starting from X0 = 0 ,

dX t = (Θ + ut) dt, |ut| ≤ U < a, 

and observations satisfy 

dY t = Xt dt + ν dV t, ν > 0.

Controls are bounded nonanticipative Borel functionals of the observation path which give a unique strong closed loop in both drift modes. The hard state constraint is K = [ −1, 1] ,including both endpoints in prediction safety. Fix H > ∆ > 0, ε ∈ (0 , 1/2) , and α ∈ (0 , 1) . At each grid time, the receding-horizon law must select a measurable 

H-window observation-feedback continuation whose condi-tional mixture probability of remaining in K throughout the window is at least 1 − ε. It applies the choice for ∆ time and reoptimizes. Let τF be the first grid time at which this conditional feasible set is empty, and let Tν be the supremum of horizons T for which some such law satisfies 

P{min( τK , τ F ) > T } ≥ 1 − α, 

with the prescribed zero convention when no initial selection exists. Assume the resonant parameter relations 

τ = 1

a − U ,τ − H = m∆,r = m∆ > 1

a ,ℓ = r + ∆ ,

0 < ∆ < H < 1

a + U

where m is a positive integer. Put q = max {p0, 1 − p0} and 

L =

r, 1 − α ≥ q, ℓ, 1 − α < q. 

The equality case belongs to the short phase. Decide whether, for every such parameter tuple, 

lim  

> ν↓0

Tν = L. 

The limit is taken through positive-noise information struc-tures, using fixed regular conditional versions on canonical observation-path space. 

P026: Positive four-step minimax schedules Problem. For any positive finite dimension, let f be convex, differentiable, and L-smooth, with minimizer x⋆ and ∥x0 −

x⋆∥ ≤ D. For a nonadaptive four-step schedule h ∈ R4, run 

xt+1 = xt − ht

L ∇f (xt), 0 ≤ t < 4,

and define 

W4(h) = sup f (x4) − f (x⋆)

LD 2 ,

where the supremum ranges over every admissible instance in every finite dimension. Set 

V4 = inf  

> h∈R4

W4(h), H4 = {h : W4(h) = V4},

N4 = {h : min  

> 0≤t≤3

ht ≤ 0}, V − 

> 4

= inf 

> h∈N 4

W4(h).

The scalar quadratic lower barrier 

Q4(h) = max 

> 0≤a≤1

a

2

> 3

Y

> t=0

(1 − ah t)2

may be used, but does not replace the complete smooth-convex worst case. Decide whether 

V − 

> 4

> V 4.

After establishing the necessary attainment and compactness facts, this is equivalent to every h ∈ H 4 having all four coordinates strictly positive. The problem asks only for this sign geometry, not the exact value V4, a classification of H4,or an arbitrary-horizon theorem. 

P027: Perfect-incoherence collision constant Problem. Fix d ≥ 1. For each k, let L⋆,k ∈ Rnk ×nk have exact rank rk, smallest nonzero singular value σk > 0, and singular spaces Uk, V k. Assume nk → ∞ ,

rk

nk

= 14d ,

and perfect incoherence: 

∥U T 

> k

ei∥2 = ∥V T 

> k

ej ∥2 = 14d for every i, j. 

Let Ω1,k , Ω2,k be two supports, each separately having at most d entries in every row and every column. With 

Ωk = Ω 1,k ∪ Ω2,k and T⋆,k the tangent space of the rank-rk

manifold, define 

τk =  1 − ∥ PΩk PT⋆,k ∥2 

> F→F

1/2 > 0

and assume τk → 0.Let Rk be the global infimum of ∥L′ − L⋆,k ∥F over all distinct competitors L′ of rank at most rk, satisfying the same leverage cap, for which 

L⋆,k + S = L′ + T, supp S ⊆ Ω1,k , supp T ⊆ Ω2,k .

Rank-dropping and otherwise undisplayed competitors are included; if none exists, Rk = ∞. Define 

κd = inf  

> all admissible sequences

lim inf 

> k→∞

Rk

σkτk

.

Decide whether 

κd = 2 √2 for every d ≥ 1.

Scale normalization may set σk = 1 , but no lower bound may be imposed on any other singular value. P028: Open-basin cyclic OMWU failure Problem. For 0 < q < 1, set 

Jq = 1

p1 + q + q2

0 1 −q

−q 0 11 −q 0

!

.

Consider the canonical three-player, two-action triangle game whose affine payoff-difference map vanishes at 

(1 /2, 1/2, 1/2) and has normalized Jacobian Jq . This pro-file is required to be the unique Nash equilibrium over all support patterns. From arbitrary strictly interior profiles at times −1, 0, all players run exact optimistic multiplica-tive weights with learning rate 1/16 . In logit coordinates 

yi = log( xi/(1 − xi)) and z = x − (1 /2, 1/2, 1/2) , the history map is 

Tq (y, y ′) = 



y − 116 Jq (2 z − z′), y 



.

Let Eq be the set of strictly interior two-profile histo-ries whose exact profile orbit is not Cauchy, equivalently, by compactness, has at least two distinct accumulation points. Interior is relative to the six-dimensional history space 

H = (int ∆ 32)2 ∼= (0 , 1) 6.

It is known that Eq̸ = ∅ throughout some punctured interval ending at q = 1 .Decide whether there exists q0 ∈ (0 , 1) such that 

int H Eq̸ = ∅ (q0 < q < 1) .

The exact negative alternative is that for every q0 < 1, some 

q ∈ (q0, 1) has Eq of empty relative interior. Membership always refers to the exact infinite-time recurrence. The prob-lem concerns robustness under perturbing the initial history inside this canonical family, not perturbations of the game Jacobian or mere nonemptiness of Eq .

P029: Bounded split certificates in defect one Problem. Let X be a real Banach space for which JX (X)

has codimension one in X∗∗ . Let A, B : X ⇒ X∗ be maxi-mal monotone and 

dom A ∩ int(dom B)̸ = ∅.

Suppose (x, x ∗) /∈ gra( A + B), but 

⟨x − y, x ∗ − a∗ − b∗⟩ ≥ 0

for every y ∈ X, a∗ ∈ Ay , and b∗ ∈ By .For maximal monotone T , let 

FT (x, u ∗) = sup  

> (y,y ∗)∈gra T

 ⟨x, y ∗⟩ + ⟨y, u ∗⟩ − ⟨ y, y ∗⟩.

A finite lifted graph–epigraph system for T consists of prob-abilities θi, graph points (yi, y ∗ 

> i

), and excesses δi ≥ 0, with barycentres 

¯y = X

> i

θiyi, ,

¯y∗ = X

> i

θiy∗ 

> i

, ,hT = X

> i

θi(⟨yi, y ∗ 

> i

⟩ + δi).

Pair one system for A with one for B and define its payoff 

P = ⟨x, ¯a∗ + ¯b∗⟩ + ⟨¯b − x, x ∗⟩ − hA − hB .

Decide whether the positive Fitzpatrick split separation can always be represented by a net of such paired systems for which JX (¯ a) and JX (¯b) converge weak-star in X∗∗ to the same point, the two dual barycentres converge weak-star in 

X∗, the heights have finite limits, and 

lim inf P ≥ η

for some η > 0, while one constant R < ∞ uniformly bounds 

∥¯a∥ + ∥¯b∥ + ∥¯a∗∥ + ∥¯b∗∥ + |hA| + |hB |.

No common-primal graph synchronization or claim of max-imality of A + B is part of the target. 

P030: Unit-weight elliptic moment obstructions Problem. Let 

E = {(x, y ) ∈ R2 : y2 = (1 − x2)(2 − x), −1 ≤ x ≤ 1},

let Vd be the restrictions to E of real plane polynomials of total degree at most d, and let Ur (E) consist of the probability measures assigning weight 1/r to each of exactly r distinct points of E. Write 

Φd(μ)( p) = 

Z

> E

p dμ, p ∈ Vd.

Decide whether, for every d, r ≥ 1 with 3d ≤ 2r, there are distinct μ, ν ∈ U r (E) such that 

Φd(μ) = Φ d(ν).

These are unit-coefficient obstructions, stronger than arbi-trary balanced weighted dependencies. One possible con-struction starts with s = ⌈3d/ 2⌉, distinct xi ∈ (−1, 1) ,

yi = p(1 − x2 

> i

)(2 − xi), and signs εi satisfying 

> s

X

> i=1

εiyixji = 0 , 0 ≤ j ≤ s − 2,

then vertically flips the atoms and pads both measures with common new atoms when s < r .The assertion also requires at least one ambiguous pair to admit the following canonical sparse-moment lift. Use clique variables (x, y, u ) and (x, y, v ), set the private coordinates to zero, retain moments through degree 2r, impose the oval equation, interval and compact ball constraints, and require 

rank Mr = rank Mr−1 = r

in both cliques. Couple the two independently flat sequences by equality of exactly the separator integrals in Vd, with no implicit higher-degree identifications. There must be no global representing measure having both distinct separator marginals. Nonuniform weights and prescribed support configura-tions are outside the claim. P031: Directional recovery of optimistic Clarke slopes Problem. Let 

q(x, z ) = 12 zTHz + ( c + xa )Tz, S(x) = arg min 

> z∈P

q(x, z ),ϕF (x) = min  

> z∈S(x)

F (x, z ),AF (x) = arg min 

> z∈S(x)

F (x, z ).

Let K(x) be the set of pairs (z, λ ) satisfying 

Az ≤ b, Hz + c + xa + ATλ = 0 ,λ ≥ 0, λi(Aiz − bi) = 0 for every i. 

A tuple (¯ z, λ, w, ν, d ) is a formal directional KKT response when (¯ z, λ ) ∈ K(0) ,

Hw + da + ATν = 0 ,

and, for every i,

Ai ¯z < b i =⇒ νi = 0 ,λi > 0 =⇒ Aiw = 0 ,Ai ¯z = bi, λ i = 0 =⇒ Aiw ≤ 0, ν i ≥ 0, ν iAiw = 0 .

Let Zd be the set of ¯z ∈ S(0) for which such λ, w, ν exist. For ε > 0, B ∈ M , and ¯z ∈ S(0) , define 

qε,B, ¯z (x, z ) = q(x, z ) + ε

2 (z − ¯z)TB(z − ¯z),

and let sε,B, ¯z (x) be its unique minimizer over P . For d ∈{− 1, 1}, set 

rd,ε,B,F (¯ z) = d lim 

> t↓0

F  td, s ε,B, ¯z (td ) − F (0 , ¯z)

t .

Let Rd(F ) be the set of all finite limits of 

rd,ε k ,B k ,F (zk)

along sequences εk ↓ 0, Bk ∈ M , and zk ∈ AF (0) ∩ Zd.When this set is nonempty and the indicated value is finite, define 

σd(F ) = d inf {dr : r ∈ R d(F )}.

Thus 

σ1(F ) = inf R1(F ), σ−1(F ) = sup R−1(F ),

and CF is the closed convex hull of {σ−1(F ), σ 1(F )}.For every upper-active formal response, define 

g = d−1 d ∂ xF (0 , ¯z) + ∇z F (0 , ¯z)Tw .

Let ΓF be the closed convex hull of all such g, over d ∈{− 1, 1}, ¯z ∈ AF (0) , and all λ, w, ν satisfying the formal directional response system. The Clarke set ∂C ϕF (0) is the closed convex hull of all finite limits of ordinary derivatives ϕ′ 

> F

(xk) along differen-tiability points xk → 0.The parameter x is scalar, the reference parameter is 0, and all local directional statements use x=t d with d ∈{-1,1} and t↓0. The lower problem minimizes q(x,z)=z T Hz/2+(c+xa) T zover the fixed nonempty compact polyhedron P={z:Az ≤b}, where H is positive semidefinite. The reference solution set S(0) is nonempty and positive-dimensional; nearby solution sets remain nonempty and com-pact because P is fixed and compact. The lower polyhedral constraints satisfy Slater regularity and the constant-rank constraint qualification at every refer-ence solution. Reference-only transverse quadratic growth holds: there exist κ > 0 and r >0 such that q(0,z)-min over P of q(0, ·)≥ κ

dist(z,S(0)) 2 for every z ∈P with dist(z,S(0)) < r. No uniform growth assertion for x ̸=0 is assumed. The upper objective F is twice continuously differentiable, and the universally quantified upper-objective class consists exactly of those such F for which the optimistic value ϕF is locally Lipschitz near 0. Scalar affine-parametric convex quadratic lower problems over fixed compact polyhedra satisfying exactly A1-A6. All directional KKT equations, accessible sets, regularized slope sets, directional extrema, ΓF , and the Clarke set are defined below without external references. Auxiliary strongly convex regularizations need not satisfy A3. A center ¯z contributes in direction d only when ¯z belongs to AF (0) ∩Zd.The metric B ranges over all symmetric positive-definite matrices with trace(B)=1. For fixed ε, B, ¯z, and d, first take the derivative as t de-creases to zero and only then take cluster limits as ε decreases to zero. After forming the raw finite slope-cluster set Rd(F), re-tain σd(F)=d inf{d r:r ∈ Rd(F)}; equivalently σ1=inf R1 and 

σ−1=sup R−1.The positive target includes proving that both raw clus-ter sets are nonempty and that their directionally relevant extrema are finite real numbers. For every A1-A6 instance and authorized upper objec-tive F, determine whether centered Tikhonov regularizations over all normalized positive-definite metrics recover the two Clarke endpoints after restricting centers to directionally ac-cessible upper-active reference solutions and applying the optimistic directional extremum. Raw regularization slopes are not convexified directly: the positive-side endpoint is their infimum and the negative-side endpoint is their supre-mum. Determine also whether the resulting endpoint hull is contained in the fully explicit formal KKT slope hull ΓF .

P032: Exact stationary penalties with fixed lower normals Problem. For each i, define 

ci = ∥ai∥2 > 0, qi(y) = aT 

> i

y − bi

ci

, ∇y qi = ai

ci

.

Let ϕFB (a, b ) = √a2 + b2 − a − b, and define 

RKKT (x, y, μ ) = ∇y f (x, y ) + X

> i

μi∇y qi

> 1

+ X

> i

([ qi(y)] + + [ −μi]+

+ |ϕFB (−qi(y), μ i)|) .For ρ > 0, set 

Φρ(x, y, μ ) = −x + ρRKKT (x, y, μ ).

A triple (x, y, μ ) is ambient Clarke-stationary when 0 be-longs to the Clarke subdifferential of Φρ with respect to 

x, u, v and every multiplier coordinate. The upper objective F, lower objective f, and lower con-straint functions gi are twice continuously differentiable near the reference pair; the upper problem has no locally active constraint, and lower constraints use the sign convention 

gi(x,y) less than or equal to zero. For every nearby x, the lower problem is convex in y, has a nonempty locally compact solution set S(x), and its normalized KKT system characterizes S(x). Fix a reference KKT triple (xbar,ybar,mubar). The set S(xbar) contains a positive-dimensional face H through ybar. 

¯Λ denotes the complete set of normalized KKT multipliers at (xbar,ybar), contains mubar, and need not be a single-ton; isolated follower solutions and strong regularity are not assumed. Every subfamily of lower-constraint gradients active near H has locally constant rank, and every constraint included in the residual has ci=norm 2(∇y gi(xbar,ybar)) strictly pos-itive. There exist neighborhoods X of xbar and Y of ybar and a constant γ > 0 such that, for every x in X and every lower-feasible y in Y, f(x,y)-min w{f(x,w): gi(x,w) less than or equal to zero for all i} is at least γ times dist(y,aff(H)) squared. This is growth only normal to the reference face, not growth in dist(y,S(x)); inner semicontinuity is not assumed because face collapse is the failure under investigation. The residual uses qi=gi/ci, multipliers μi for qi, the com-ponentwise formula stated in the central object, and ambient stationarity in all variables (x,y, μ). Any proposed exactness threshold must use one fixed open neighborhood U of {xbar} times {ybar} times ¯Λ that is independent of ρ.The parameter x is scalar, y=(u,v) is in R2, F(x,y)=-x, and there are at most four lower constraints. Each gi is affine in y and independent of x, while f is a jointly total-degree-at-most-two polynomial that is convex in y. The system satisfies A1-A6, H={(0,v):-1 ≤v≤1} is a face of S(0), ybar=(0,0) lies in relint(H), and the complete normalized reference multi-plier set is nonempty and compact. No residual-slope, error-bound, multiplier-uniqueness, inner-semicontinuity, or face-persistence conclusion is assumed. For 1 ≤i≤m≤4, gi(x,y)= aTi y-bi with constant ai and bi;hence every normalized gradient ∇y qi is independent of x and y. The lower objective f(x,u,v) is a real polynomial of joint total degree at most two and is convex in (u,v) for every nearby x. The reference point is xbar=0, ybar=(0,0), and H={(0,v):-1≤v≤1} is contained in S(0) with ybar in relint(H). The complete normalized multiplier set ¯Λ at (0,(0,0)) is nonempty and compact, but may be non-singleton. The upper objective is F(x,u,v)=-x and has no active upper constraint. Exactness means RKKT (x,y, μ)=0 for the full normalized KKT triple, including complementarity and multiplier cor-rectness. Prove or refute that parameter-independent affine lower constraints eliminate the rotating-normal cancellation re-sponsible for jointly quadratic stationary nonexactness, so that the normalized Fischer-Burmeister lower-KKT residual is finitely exact for ambient Clarke stationarity near the rela-tive interior of a positive-dimensional follower-solution face. 

P033: Excursion-wise coercivity for inexact proximal gra-dients Problem. Let F = f + g, and define 

dk = xk+1 − xk, ck = 1

tk

− Lk

2 .

For dk̸ = 0 , set 

θk = ∥rk∥∥dk∥ , sk = ck − θk.

A zero step contributes the zero matrix. For ρ > 0, let 

qρ(p) = min {q > p : ∥xq − xp∥ ≥ ρ},

provided this set is nonempty. For a completed excursion, define 

Dp,ρ =

> qρ(p)−1

X

> k=p

dkdT 

> k

,Ap,ρ =

> qρ(p)−1

X

> k=p

skdkdT 

> k

.

Work in a finite-dimensional Euclidean space with F=f+g, where f is continuously differentiable with globally L-Lipschitz gradient, g is proper closed convex, and F is bounded below. The generated trajectory is bounded; for any proposed single-point convergence conclusion, F has the Kurdyka-Lojasiewicz property on the trajectory’s cluster set. For every accepted update dk=xk+1 -xk, backtracking re-turns tk in [ tmin ,tmax ] and an observable Lk in [0,L ¯] for some finite L ¯ such that f( xk+1 ) is at most f( xk)+ < ∇

f( xk), dk >+( Lk/2) ∥dk∥2, and ck=1/ tk-Lk/2 is positive. The inner solver returns an observable residual rk satisfy-ing rk in ∇ f( xk)+partial g( xk+1 )+ dk/tk.For dk nonzero define θk=∥rk∥/∥dk∥ and require θk ≤ ck-

mk for an observable mk in (0, ck]; if dk=0 require rk=0. No uniform positive lower bound, summability, eventual exact-ness, or prescribed decay is assumed for mk or rk.The choices of tk and mk may use all prior residuals and all current backtracking outcomes, but the accepted pair (xk+1 ,rk) must satisfy A3-A5 before the next outer iteration. Finite-dimensional Euclidean composite optimization un-der exactly A1-A6. The condition uses maximal observable slack and endogenous first-exit blocks rather than calendar windows. The coefficient ηρ may depend on the fixed ex-cursion scale and need not remain positive as ρ tends to zero. Individual slacks may vanish, excursion lengths may diverge, and no uniform relative-error gap, residual summa-bility, prescribed schedule, finite-length premise, dyadic co-ercivity, strong convexity, or isolated-critical-point condition is imposed. For dk nonzero define θk=∥rk∥/∥dk∥ and sk=ck-θk >0; a zero step contributes the zero matrix. For each fixed ρ > 0 and starting index p, qρ(p) is the least q> p satisfying ∥xq -xp∥≥ ρ, when such q exists. For every fixed ρ > 0 there exist ηρ >0 and Pρ such that 

Ap,ρ ≥ ηρDp,ρ in positive-semidefinite order for every com-pleted minimal ρ-excursion starting at p ≥ Pρ.The constants may depend on ρ, and no coercivity is re-quired on dyadic, fixed-length, or arbitrary non-excursion windows. Consider any bounded trajectory satisfying A1-A6. For each nonzero step set sk=ck-∥rk∥/∥dk∥. For ρ>0 and p ≥0, let qρ(p) be the first q>p with ∥xq -xp∥≥ ρ, when it exists. On this minimal excursion define Dp,ρ =Pqρ(p)−1 

> k=p

dkdTk and 

Ap,ρ =Pqρ(p)−1 

> k=p

skdkdTk . Determine whether convergence to one critical point follows if, for every fixed ρ>0, there are 

ηρ>0 and Pρ such that Ap,ρ is positive-semidefinite greater than or equal to ηρDp,ρ for every p ≥ Pρ having a completed 

ρ-excursion. 

P034: Discounted error budgets for proximal gradients Problem. Let F = f + g, and define 

qk = ∥xk+1 − xk∥2

tk

.

The proximal-gradient model and its gap are 

Qk(y) = f (xk) + ⟨∇ f (xk), y − xk⟩ + ∥y − xk∥2

2tk

+ g(y),γk = Qk(xk+1 ) − inf  

> y

Qk(y).

The discounted anti-hoarding rule is 

0 ≤ Bk+1 ≤ ηB k + βq k for every k, 

where 0 < η < 1 and 0 ≤ β < ∞ are fixed. A trajectory has finite length when X

> k≥0

∥xk+1 − xk∥ < ∞.

A point x is critical when 0 belongs to ∇ f(x)+partial g(x). The ambient space is finite-dimensional Euclidean space, F=f+g is proper and bounded below, f is continuously differ-entiable with an L-Lipschitz gradient for an unknown finite L, and g is proper, closed, and convex. The initial sublevel set is bounded, the critical set is nonempty, and F has the Kurdyka-Lojasiewicz property on the relevant sublevel set; its exponent and desingularizing function are not algorithm inputs. At iteration k, geometric backtracking selects a positive stepsize tk bounded away from zero and ∞ and accepts an approximate minimizer xk+1 of the standard strongly convex proximal-gradient model. The inner solver returns a computable certificate ek

equal to or dominating the proximal-model objective gap, and accepted iterates satisfy F( xk+1 ) ≤ F( xk)-c ⋆∥xk+1 -

xk∥2/tk+ek for a fixed c >0. For fixed ρ in (0,1), the account starts with B0=0 and satisfies Bk+1 =Bk+ρc∥xk+1 -xk∥2/tk-ek ≥ 0. No exogenous summability, decay rate, eventual exactness, or per-iteration relative upper bound is imposed on ek beyond the accepted-descent test and the account constraint. Finite-dimensional composite objectives and backtrack-ing inexact proximal-gradient trajectories satisfying exactly A1-A6, specialized to c=1/4 and ρ=1/2. The discount η is fixed strictly between zero and one, β is fixed and finite, and certificates may strictly dominate their true model gaps. No exogenous accuracy schedule, eventual exactness, strong convexity, isolated-critical-point condition, or prescribed er-ror decay is allowed. Unlike the established age-one capabil-ity Bk+1 ≤ βq k, the discounted rule permits positive balance inherited from arbitrarily old descent, with geometrically de-caying influence. Set c=1/4 and ρ=1/2, so Bk+1 =Bk+qk/8-ek and F( xk)+ Bk

decreases by at least qk/8 at each accepted step. Fix η in (0,1) and β in [0, ∞), and require 0 ≤ Bk+1 ≤ηBk+βq k for every k. Quantify over every certificate authorized by A4, including certificates strictly larger than the true proximal-model gap. The proof may use the established finite age-one-cap result only on a legitimately derived age-one-capped trajectory; it may not assume that the discounted rule implies Bk+1 ≤C

qk for some finite C. Fix c=1/4 and ρ=1/2. For qk=∥xk+1 -xk∥2/tk, fix η in (0,1) and finite β ≥0 and augment A5 by the computable dis-counted cap 0 ≤ Bk+1 ≤η B k+βq k. Determine whether ev-ery resulting trajectory has finite length and converges to one critical point. 

P035: Weak-only convergence under harmonic metric drift Problem. rk+1 = Mk(xk − xk+1 ) − λ(axk+1 + 2 Bx k −

Bx k−1), with axk+1 in A xk+1 .Set y−1 = x−1 and y0 = x0. For every k greater than or equal to 0, yk+1 is the unique point for which there exists 

ayk+1 in A yk+1 satisfying Mk(yk − yk+1 ) = λ(ayk+1 +2By k − By k−1). 

δk is the least nonnegative δ such that (1 + δ)−1Mk is less than or equal to Mk+1 , which is less than or equal to 

(1 + δ)Mk in Loewner order. When xk+1 differs from xk, ε k=∥rk+1 ∥_{ M −1 

> k

}/ ∥xk+1 −

xk∥Mk ; otherwise εk=0 and rk+1 =0. An orbit z has persistent strong failure when zk converges weakly to 0 and limsup k ∥zk∥>0. H is a separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert space. A:H ⇒H is a nonzero linear maximally monotone operator, B:H →H is a nonzero bounded linear monotone L-Lipschitz operator, and zer(A+B)={0}. Each Mk is bounded and self-adjoint with mI ≼ Mk ≼MI for fixed 0 < m≤M< ∞, M kx → M∈f tyx for every x ∈H, and δk is the least δ ≥0 such that (1 + δ)−1Mk ≼ Mk+1 ≼

(1 + δ)Mk.There exist constants 0 < c≤C< ∞ and K such that c/(k+1) ≤ δk ≤C/(k+1) for every k ≥K; in particular, ( δk)belongs to ℓp for every p >1 and does not belong to ℓ1.The constant stepsize satisfies 0 < λ < m/(2L). For each k there are ak+1 ∈ Ax k+1 and rk+1 =

Mk(xk − xk+1 ) − λ(ak+1 + 2 Bx k − Bx k−1). Set 

εk=∥rk+1 ∥_{ M −1 

> k

}/ ∥xk+1 − xk∥Mk when xk+1 ̸ =xk and 

εk=0 otherwise, requiring rk+1 =0 in the latter case. The re-alized ratios satisfy Σkεk < ∞, and rk+1 ̸ =0 for infinitely many k. For the same A, B, λ, limiting metric M∞, and every initial pair, the exact fixed-M∞ forward-reflected-backward orbit converges strongly to 0. Along the candidate orbit there are cB >0 and KB such that ∥Bx k∥≥ cB ∥xk∥ for all k ≥ KB , and the selected values 

ak+1 are nonzero infinitely often. For the same A, metrics, 

λ, and every initial pair, deleting B and setting all residuals to zero yields a variable-metric proximal orbit converging strongly to 0. Separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert-space data sat-isfying exactly A1–A8. The auxiliary sequence y is the exact variable-metric FRB replay using the same A, B, metrics, stepsize, and initial pair as the selected A6 orbit; it is an additional target object, not a replacement for the genuinely inexact selected orbit. The selected orbit x and exact replay y use identical H, A, B, Mk, λ, x −1 = y−1, and x0 = y0.The selected orbit x must still satisfy A6, including summable realized relative residual ratios and infinitely many nonzero residuals; only the auxiliary replay y has zero resid-ual. The harmonic bounds apply to the least two-sided relative drift δk from A3. The exact replay must satisfy yk weakly converging to 0 and limsup k ∥yk∥>0. The every-initial-pair fixed-limit control in A7 and B-deleted variable-metric control in A8 must hold for the same operators and metrics. Determine whether the established weak-without-strong behavior can be realized as a metric-driven phenomenon: seek one datum satisfying A1–A8 whose selected inexact orbit xk converges weakly but not strongly to zero and whose unique residual-free variable-metric FRB replay yk from the same initial pair also converges weakly but not strongly to zero. 

H.2 Refuted Problems 

P036: Adaptivity in one-dimensional biased search Problem. Every query x returns y(x)=f(x)+b(x). For an algorithm A, W(A)=sup over f in FL and b in Bβ of f( bxA) − min x∈X f(x), where bxA is A’s transcript-dependent output. 

Rad n (L, β)=inf over A in Alg ad (n) of W(A). 

Rob n (L, β)=inf over A in Alg ob (n) of W(A). For every η≥ 0, N ∗ 

> 1

(L, β,η) is the least n with 

Rad n (L, β) ≤η, with ∞ if no such n exists. The dimension d is a positive integer, and the search do-main is [0,1] d equipped with the ∞ norm. The objective f:[0,1] d to the real numbers is L-Lipschitz for a known L >0. The oracle returns y(x)=f(x)+b(x), where b:[0,1] d to the real numbers is one fixed field throughout the run and satisfies 

| b(x) |≤ β at every point; no regularity of b, gradients, or stochastic samples are available. The algorithm is deterministic, may choose each query adaptively from previous returned values, knows d, L, β, and 

ε, and may output any point x ˆ in the cube whether or not it was queried. For ε ≥ 0, N ∗ 

> d

(L, β, ε ) is the least worst-case evaluation cap guaranteeing f(x ˆ)-min x f(x) ≤ ε for every admissible pair (f,b), and equals ∞ when no finite cap has this property. The principal positive-bias regime is 0 < β < L/4; for the superthreshold asymptotic, ε = 2 β + δ with δ > 0 while d, L, and β remain fixed and δ decreases to zero. One-dimensional deterministic global minimization on [0,1] with one fixed arbitrary field satisfying | b(x) |≤ β. Both algorithm classes may output any queried or unqueried point as a function of their observations. This is a finite-horizon structural comparison, not a restatement of the previously attempted leading-constant limit. Fix d=1 and X=[0,1] with its usual distance. An oblivious algorithm fixes all query sites before see-ing oracle values, although its output may depend on the complete observation vector. For each integer n ≥1, both classes use at most n evalua-tions and are compared by worst-case simple regret. Each algorithm is chosen before the adversarial pair (f,b) and must work uniformly over every f in FL and b in Bβ .In dimension d=1, determine whether deterministic adap-tivity is completely powerless at every finite query horizon: for every L>0, every 0< β<L/4, and every integer n ≥1, is the minimax worst-case simple regret among adaptive n-query algorithms equal to that among algorithms whose n query sites are fixed before any oracle value is observed? 

P037: Static topology cost in directed gradient tracking Problem. For I in DSTATIC (η), z⋆ =(P3 

> i=1

hiri)/(P3 

> i=1

hi). For an anchor-defined trajectory, Eαk =(norm (xk −1z⋆ )22 +

α2 norm (yk)22)(1 /2) .

Rk(I, α) is the supremum of Eα/E 0 

> k

α over all x0 satisfy-ing the tracker-consistent initialization y0 = ∇ F( x0) and 

Eα 

> 0

>0. 

SSTATIC (I) = α > 0 : sup 

> k≥0

Rk(I, α ) < +∞,

lim  

> k→+∞

Rk(I, α ) = 0 .Tε(I, α)=inf{K in {0,1,2,. . . }: sup k≥K Rk(I, α) ≤ ε}, with value + ∞ when this set is empty. 

NSTATIC (ε, η ) = sup 

> I∈DSTATIC (η)

inf  

> α∈SSTATIC (I)

Tε(I, α ),

with the inner infimum equal to +∞ when SSTATIC (I) is empty. There are n ≥3 agents with scalar objectives fi(z) =

hi(z −ri)2/2, where 1 ≤ hi ≤2. Their average has the unique minimizer z⋆ , and ∇ F(x)=( hi(xi − ri)) ni=1 .For a constant α > 0, the algorithm is xk+1 = Akxk −αy k

and yk+1 = Bkyk + ∇ F( xk+1 ) − ∇ F( xk), with tracker-consistent initialization y0 = ∇ F( x0). Each Ak is row-stochastic and each Bk is column-stochastic. Both have positive diagonal entries, and for i ̸=j, 

(Ak)ij >0 if and only if (Bk)ij >0 if and only if the directed edge j →i is present at time k. Every positive entry of either matrix is at least η, where 0 < η ≤1/2. For a fixed integer H ≥1, the union of the directed graphs in every H consecutive times is strongly connected. An admissible instance I consists of the objective data and matrix schedule satisfying A1-A4, but not an initial-ization. For each I and α, E αk , Rk, T ε, S(I), and NGT are defined as in the claim shape, with Rk taking the supre-mum over all tracker-consistent x0 having Eα 

> 0

>0 and NGT 

taking the supremum over all admissible instances. An in-stance with S(I) empty makes NGT infinite. No finiteness or heterogeneity-control property of the chosen normalization is assumed. All scalar-quadratic data allowed by A1 and all constant row-stochastic and column-stochastic matrix pairs satisfying A2-A5 with n=3, H=1, common strongly connected posi-tive off-diagonal support, positive diagonals, and every pos-itive entry at least η. Stepsizes are instance-aware and opti-mized over the explicitly defined tracker-reachable stability set SSTATIC (I).Fix n=3 and H=1 and require Ak=A and Bk=B for every nonnegative integer k. Take the supremum over every admissible static common-support pair and every scalar-quadratic objective allowed by A1. Optimize over every α in SSTATIC (I), where SSTATIC (I)

is defined solely through the tracker-consistent envelopes 

Rk(I, α). Restrict A1-A5 to n=3, H=1, and constant matrices Ak=A and Bk=B. For each static admissible instance I, explic-itly define SSTATIC (I) as the set of α>0 for which the tracker-consistent envelope is uniformly bounded and con-verges to zero. Define NSTATIC (ε,η) using the infimum over 

SSTATIC (I). Determine whether NSTATIC (ε,η) is uniformly comparable to η(−2) log(1/ ε) for all sufficiently small η and 

ε.

P038: Finite length of anchored variable-metric proximal orbits Problem. Define dk = xk+1 − xk.Define LN = PNk=0 ∥dk∥.The orbit has finite length when sup N LN < ∞, equiva-lently P

> k≥0

∥dk∥ < ∞.H is a real Hilbert space; T:H ⇒H is maximal monotone; and S={x ∈H:0 ∈T(x)} is nonempty. Each Mk is bounded, self-adjoint, and strongly positive, with αI≼ Mk ≼ βI for fixed 0 < α ≤ β < ∞, and 

(1 + ηk)−1Mk ≼ Mk+1 ≼ (1 + ηk)Mk for ηk ≥0 with 

Σkηk < ∞. These conditions make ( Mk) operator-norm Cauchy; denote its strongly positive limit by M∞.The parameters satisfy 0 < c min ≤ ck ≤ cmax < ∞ and 0≤ σk ≤ ¯σ < 1. Define 

T ε(y) = {v : ⟨y − z, v − w⟩ ≥ − ε

for every (z, w ) ∈ gra T }.

Given xk, choose (yk, v k, ε k) with εk ≥ 0, v k ∈ T εk (yk),and 

δk = ckMkvk + yk − xk,

such that 

∥δk∥2 

> M−1
> k

+ 2 ckεk ≤ σ2

> k

 ∥ckMkvk∥2 

> M−1
> k

+ ∥yk − xk∥2 

> M−1
> k

.

Set Hk={z ∈H: ⟨z−yk, v k⟩≤ εk}. Let W0=H; for k ≥1 let 

Wk={z ∈H: ⟨z−xk, M −1

> k−1

(x0 − xk)⟩≤ 0}. Define xk+1 =arg min z∈Hk ∩Wk 

> 12

∥z−x0∥_{ M −1 

> k

}2.All real Hilbert spaces and exactly the recurrence, met-ric drift, parameter bounds, and enlargement-relative-error model in A1–A5. The claim quantifies over every admis-sible triple sequence and adds no compactness, regularity, finite-dimensionality, or error-summability assumption. Quantify over every sequence of triples satisfying A4 and the iterates generated by A5. Measure length by P

> k≥0

∥xk+1 − xk∥ in the ambient Hilbert norm. The target is finite total variation, not the already resolved norm convergence or square-summability of increments. Under A1–A5, determine whether every admissible an-chored orbit has finite total variation, namely whether P

> k≥0

∥xk+1 − xk∥ converges. 

P039: Last residuals under square-summable metric drift Problem. T ε(y) = {v : ⟨v − w, y − z⟩ ≥−ε for every (z, w ) ∈ gra T }.

∥u∥2 

> M−1
> k

= ⟨u, M −1 

> k

u⟩.

δk = ckMkvk + yk − xk.

ek = yk − xk.The space is Rn for some finite n, T: Rn⇒Rn is maximally monotone, zer(T) is nonempty, and x0 is arbitrary. Each Mk is symmetric positive definite, fixed constants 0< m≤L< ∞ satisfy mI ≼ Mk ≼LI, and Pk≥0 ∥Mk+1 −

Mk∥2 

> op

< ∞; neither Pk≥0 ∥Mk+1 − Mk∥op < ∞ nor convergence or commutativity of the metrics is assumed. The proximal parameters satisfy 0 < cmin ≤ ck ≤

cmax < ∞.For one fixed σ ∈ [0 , 1) , each εk ≥ 0 and vk ∈ T εk (yk).With δk = ckMkvk + yk − xk, require 

∥δk∥2 

> M−1
> k

+ 2 ckεk ≤ σ2∥yk − xk∥2 

> M−1
> k

.

The accepted update is xk+1 = xk − ckMkvk. No bound-edness, residual convergence, error summability, strong monotonicity, metric subregularity, simultaneous diagonal-ization, or eventual metric stationarity is assumed. Finite-dimensional maximal monotone inclusions with one fixed operator, bounded positive proximal parameters, the graph/enlargement-relative error condition of A4, and the direct update of A5. The conclusion concerns every com-puted last-evaluation residual, not an ergodic or best-iterate quantity. The same maximally monotone operator T is used at every iteration. Only the square-summability required in A2 is available; metric convergence, commutativity, and summable total vari-ation cannot be invoked. The target is the full-sequence limit of ∥vk∥+εk for the actual evaluations appearing in A4. Determine whether every trajectory satisfying A1–A5 nec-essarily obeys lim k→∞ (∥vk∥+εk)=0 when the uniformly conditioned metrics have square-summable operator-norm increments but may have infinite total variation. 

P040: A class-wide hyperbolic growth exponent Problem. 

Dϕ(x, y ) = ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)− < ∇ϕ(y), x − y > Pϕ(y) = arg min 

> x∈N

{∥ x∥2+λ−1Dϕ(x, y )},eϕ(y) = ∥Pϕ(y)∥2+λ−1Dϕ(Pϕ(y), y ), G ϕ(y) = ∇eϕ(y),

and Vϕ(y) = λ−1(∇ϕ(y)-∇ϕ(Pϕ(y))). 

Tϕ(s, z 2) = ( s, ∂ 2ϕ(s, z 2) − ∂2ϕ(0)) ,

Ωϕ = Tϕ(W ), and zeta 0 

> ϕ

= Tϕ(0) . Strict positivity of ∂22 ϕ

makes Tϕ a diffeomorphism from W onto Ωϕ.For every simply connected proper plane domain Ω, d Ω

denotes the curvature-minus-four Poincare distance, normal-ized on the unit disk by dD (0 , r )=artanh(r). For x = Pϕ(y) nonzero, Delta ϕ(y) =2 max t∈[0 ,1] dΩ,ϕ (zeta 0

> ϕ

, T ϕ(x+t(y-x))). Q( R)=max{1,sup{ ∥Vϕ(y)∥/∥Gϕ(y)∥:( ϕ,y) in ER}}, in-terpreted in [1,+ ∞] and with the supremum of an empty set omitted by the outer maximum. 

LMA = limsup R→∞ log( Q(R)) /Rin [0 , +∞]

The function f is proper and lower semicontinuous and is relatively prox-regular at a stationary pair ( ¯x,0) with respect to a fixed reference Legendre kernel on a neighborhood of ¯x.There are convex neighborhoods V contained in the inte-rior of N, with compact closure of N contained in a common open domain U, and a fixed λ > 0 used for every kernel. Each ϕk is a C2 very strictly convex Legendre function on U; the kernels share their domain but may repeat, reverse, recover, or have unbounded ambient condition numbers as k varies. For every k and y in V, the minimization of f(x)+ λ−1Dϕ,k (x, y ) over x in N has a unique minimizer 

Pk(y) in the interior of N, and the resulting localized enve-lope ek is C1 on V. All gradients, Hessians, and residual norms are measured in one fixed finite-dimensional coordinate system; affine changes to ϕk are identified because they do not change its Bregman divergence. A class-wide, two-dimensional local Monge-Ampere sub-class of the anchored variable-kernel problem. The objec-tive, proximal parameter, localization neighborhoods, nor-malization point, determinant-one neighborhood, and hyper-bolic normalization are fixed. The extremum ranges directly over individual current kernels and actual localized proximal chords, not over an ambiguously quantified kernel family. Kernel order and accumulated drift do not enter Q. This functional hyperbolic exponent problem is mathematically distinct from the established three-dimensional quadratic longitudinal-cone cell with constant lower ratio 1/4. Litera-ture overlap remains unresolved because the supplied source pack is empty and no independent retrieval route is available to this role. Set n=2, ¯x = 0, λ =1/64, f(z)= ∥z∥2, U = R2,V=B(0,1/16), N=B(0,1/4), and W=B(0,1/2). Each ϕ in KMA is a global C2 very strictly convex Leg-endre kernel, is C3 on W, satisfies nabla 2ϕ(0) =I, obeys det( nabla 2ϕ(z))=1 for all z in W, and satisfies the per-kernel A4 localization and differentiability conditions on the fixed V and N. The extremal set consists directly of pairs ( ϕ,y), with ϕ

in KMA and x = Pϕ(y) nonzero; no kernel index or fixed-family quantifier occurs in Q. Every pair entering Q( R) satisfies max{ ∥Pϕ(y)∥,∥y∥}≤

1/R.The underlying Poincare metric has curvature minus four and unit-disk normalization dD (0 , r )=artanh(r), while 

Delta ϕ(y) is twice the maximum such distance along the transformed current chord. Specialize A1-A5 to dimension two with ¯x = 0 , λ =1/64, f(z)= ∥z∥2, U = R2, V=B(0,1/16), N=B(0,1/4), and W=B(0,1/2). Let KMA be the class of individual global C2 very strictly convex Legendre kernels ϕ that are C3 on W, satisfy nabla 2ϕ(0) =I and det( nabla 2ϕ)=1 on W, and satisfy the per-kernel A4 requirements for ev-ery y in V. For Tϕ(s, z2)=(s, ∂2ϕ(s, z2) − ∂2ϕ(0)), set 

Ωϕ = Tϕ(W ). Normalize the Poincare distance dΩ,ϕ 

to curvature minus four, so dD (0 , r )=artanh(r) on the unit disk, and define the exponent-normalized reach 

Delta ϕ(y) = 2 max t∈[0 ,1] dΩ,ϕ (Tϕ(0) , T ϕ(Pϕ(y)+t(y-

Pϕ(y)))). For R ≥64, define Q( R) in [1,+ ∞] as the class-wide supremum of ∥Vϕ(y)∥/∥Gϕ(y)∥ over pairs ( ϕ,y) with 

ϕ in KMA , P ϕ(y) nonzero, max ∥Pϕ(y)∥,∥y∥≤ 1/R, and 

Delta ϕ(y) ≤ R. Determine whether the class-wide growth exponent reaches the universal barrier two. 

P041: Full proximal decay at the critical perturbation order Problem. S(x)=T(x)+b(x). p=1/q >1. 

K = κ(−1/q ), cgap = K − L > 0

xk+1 = ( I + λS )(−1) (xk). 

dk = ∥xk − ¯x∥

arate =q/(1-q)=1/(p-1). The ambient space is a finite-dimensional real Hilbert space, 0 < q<1, T is maximal monotone, and ¯x is an iso-lated member of T (−1) (0). T is metrically q-subregular at ( ¯x,0) with exact finite positive modulus κ for the local inequality ∥x-¯x∥≤ κ

dist(0,T(x)) q .The perturbation b is single-valued on the ambient space and continuous near ¯x, satisfies b( ¯x)=0, and has critical-order coefficient L = limsup x→¯x,x ̸=¯ x ∥b(x) ∥/∥x-¯x∥(1 /q )

with 0 ≤L≤ κ(−1/q ).The actual pointwise sum x 7→ T(x)+b(x) is maximal mono-tone and contains 0 at ¯x; no subregularity, isolation, or con-vergence property of T+b is assumed. For the algorithmic classification, xk+1 =(I+ λ(T +

b)) (−1) (xk) uses a fixed λ > 0 and a sufficiently local initial point, and the rate observable is ∥xk − ¯x∥; locality, conver-gence, and a rate remain conclusions to be classified rather than premises. All finite-dimensional A1–A5 instances with 0≤L<κ(−1/q ), without monotonicity of b, differentiability, cyclic monotonicity, homogeneity, or a sector assumption. The claim is orbitwise and local for each fixed λ > 0. The coefficient in A3 satisfies 0 ≤L< κ (−1/q ).Do not assume b is monotone; only the actual sum S=T+b is maximal monotone as required by A4. For each instance and λ, the localization radius and fi-nite asymptotic constant may depend on the instance, λ, and initial point. Let S=T+b satisfy A1–A5 with strict critical-order gap 0≤L< κ(−1/q ). Determine whether every sufficiently lo-cal fixed-parameter proximal orbit has distance decay 

dk=O( k−q/ (1 −q)), rather than only the slower exponent ob-tained from the norm-only Fejér estimate. 

P042: Affine risk budgets in a two-step Gaussian con-troller Problem. For bounded Borel f on K, define Qu

f(x)=E[f (X1)1 X1∈K given X0=x and u0=u]. Define V1(x) = max u∈U Qu 1(x). For r=1-s and g=1-h, the propagated allocation inequal-ity is equivalent to Qu h(x) ≥s. One-step tail feasibility is equivalent to h(y) ≤ V1(y) for every y in K. Define B(x)=max over u in U and h in H of Qu h(x). A state-slack pair (x,s) is feasible exactly when s ≤B(x). If a feasible selection chooses ( ut, h t), then on a safe tran-sition st+1 = ht(Xt+1 ); the next pre-action feasibility test fails exactly when st+1 > B( Xt+1 ). Let λaf f ine,plus be the supremum over Borel minimizing selections of limsup as T tends to ∞ of P (τ > T andzeta > T )(1 /T ), starting from ( x0, s 0) = (0 , 10 (−4) ). Let λ∞ be the horizonwise unrestricted survival root rate from A6 for the same state dynamics and initial state. Fix x0 in K=[-1,1]. The observed state satisfies Xt+1 =

aX t + ut + σW t+1 , where the Wt are independent standard normal variables, σ > 0, and U is a fixed nonempty finite subset of a bounded interval. The exit time is τ =inf{t ≥ 1 : Xt is not in K}. The ab-sorbing violation variable at time s is 1τ ≤s, and the only risk operator is conditional expectation given the observed his-tory, so an N-step risk constraint at time t is exactly P( τ ≤t+N given the current history) ≤ rt.Fix N ≥2, a bounded continuous running cost, and a bounded continuous terminal cost. At each integer time t, feasibility is tested only on { τ > t} and before any time-t action is selected. Define zeta=inf{t ≥ 0 : τ > t and no fea-sible N-step plan exists from ( Xt, r t)}, with inf of the empty set equal to ∞; if zeta=t the controller stops before acting, and no feasibility test is made after exit. At a feasible pair the controller minimizes the N-step expected cost, applies the first action, and reoptimizes. The reset protocol has r0=r for a fixed r in (0,1) and resets rt=r after every safe transition; the propagated protocol starts from a fixed r0 in (0,1). Re-cursive feasibility before exit means zeta ≥ τ almost surely, equivalently P( τ > T and zeta ≤T)=0 for every integer T ≥0. Fix knots -1= k0 < k1 <. . . < km=1. A propagated successor budget is the continuous piecewise-affine inter-polant gc with coefficient vector c in [0,1] m+1 ; this com-pact Euclidean cube supplies its topology and Borel struc-ture. At state-budget pair (x,r), a first action u and coef-ficient vector c are admissible only if P( Xt+1 not in K given Xt=x,u)+ ∈ tK gc(y)P(dy given x,u) ≤r and an explic-itly length-(N-1) remaining tail is feasible from (y, gc(y))for almost every safe successor y. On a safe transition, 

rt+1 = gc(Xt+1 ); the next time then tests a new length-N problem before selecting its action. For protocol R and its class SR of Borel selections from the finite-horizon minimizing correspondence wherever that correspondence is nonempty, define, when SR is nonempty, 

λ+

> R

(x0, r 0) = sup s∈SR limsup T →∞ Ps(τ > T andzeta > T )1/T and λ− 

> R

(x0, r 0) =∈ fs∈SR liminf T →∞ Ps(τ >T andzeta > T )1/T . Selector nonexistence is recorded sep-arately and is not assigned numerical rate zero. Establishing nonempty compact feasible sections and a Borel graph from A1-A4 is part of the target, not an assumed selector certifi-cate. The infinite-horizon comparator ranges over all nonan-ticipative Borel U-valued policies, has no budget or infeasibility stopping rule, and is λ∞(x0) =

limsup T →∞ (sup pi Ppi (τ > T)) 1/T . The supremum is hori-zonwise and may use different policies for different T. An optional terminal continuation set C is a specified closed subset of K times [0,1]; any claimed continuation property must state that an admissible action and coefficient return almost every safe successor pair to C. Nonemptiness of C and its consequences are conclusions, not premises. Fix K=[-1,1], x0=0, a=1, σ=1/4, U={-1/2,1/2}, N=2, zero running and terminal costs, no terminal continuation set, and propagated-budget knots {-1,1}. Write slack as s=1-r and fix 

s0 = 10 (−4) , so r0=0.9999. Successor budgets are affine because the grid has only its two endpoints. The dynamics are Xt+1 = Xt + ut + (1 /4) Wt+1 on K=[-1,1], with U={-1/2,1/2} and x0=0. Use N=2 and the propagated protocol with knots k0=-1 and k1=1, so every successor budget and successor slack is globally affine. Fix s0 = 1 − r0 = 10 (−4) .Running and terminal costs vanish, so every feasible two-step plan is minimizing and the selector envelope ranges over all Borel feasible allocation choices. For the fixed controlled Gaussian system below, prove or refute that two-step propagated budgets restricted to globally affine successor functions have a strictly smaller best joint survival-feasibility root rate than the unrestricted controller, even when the initial risk budget is 0.9999. 

P043: A drift-free last-iterate modulus for variable-metric PDHG Problem. g⋆ denotes the Fenchel conjugate of g. T(x,y)=(partial f(x)+K y,partial g (y)-Kx), where K ⋆ is the Hilbert adjoint of K. Set Hk=(( Pk,-K ⋆),(-K, Qk)). Under A4, Hk is positive definite; write ∥u∥_(Hk)2=< H k u,u >.Set dk=( xk+1 -xk,yk+1 -yk), ek+1 =( ex(k+1), ey (k+1)), and 

wk+1 =-Hkdk-ek+1 .For h ≥0 set Ah=( P∞ 

> j=h

∥dj ∥_(Hj )2)(1 /2) .For h ≥0 set Bh=sup j≥h

√(j+1)( ∥ex(j+1) ∥+∥ey (j+1) ∥). For hk=floor(k/2), set Fk=Ahk +Bhk .Set Sk=√(k+1) ∥wk+1 ∥/Fk when Fk >0, set Sk=0 when both numerator and denominator vanish, and set Sk=∞ when 

Fk=0 but the numerator is positive. 

Cnodrif t (m,M, δ,Λ) is the supremum of Sk over all admit-ted finite-dimensional A1-A6 data, all orbits with the fixed structural bounds and total drift at most Λ, and all k ≥0. X and Y are finite-dimensional real Hilbert spaces; f on X and g on Y are proper lower-semicontinuous convex func-tions, and K:X →Y is linear. The KKT operator T(x,y)=( ∂f(x)+K y, ∂g(y)-Kx) has a nonempty zero set. For every k, the iterates satisfy 0∈

∂f( xk+1 )+K* yk+Pk(xk+1 -xk)+ exk+1 and 0 ∈ ∂g*( yk+1 )-K(2 xk+1 -xk)+ Qk(yk+1 -yk)+ eyk+1 , so ex and ey are the declared inexact-resolvent optimality residuals. 

Pk and Qk are self-adjoint positive-definite block metrics with mI ≼Pk,Qk≼MI for fixed 0 < m≤M, and ∥Q(−1/2)  

> k

K

P (−1/2)  

> k

∥≤ 1-δ for a fixed δ > 0. There are nonnegative ηk with P 

> k

ηk < ∞ such that 

(1 + ηk)(−1) Pk≼Pk+1 ≼(1 + ηk)Pk and the same two-sided relation holds for Qk.The inexactness is norm-summable: P

> k

(∥ex(k+1) ∥+∥ey (k+1) ∥)< ∞.All finite-dimensional A1-A6 variable-metric inexact PDHG orbits with fixed bounds 0 < m≤M, 0 < δ ≤1, and total relative metric drift at most Λ. The observable is the graph-valid current KKT element. No averaging, best-iterate selection, restart, strong monotonicity, bounded variation of errors, or simultaneous diagonalization of the metrics is al-lowed. For dk=( xk+1 -xk,yk+1 -yk), use wk+1 =(K ⋆(yk+1 -yk)-

Pk(xk+1 -xk)-ex(k+1),K(x (k+1)-xk)-Qk(yk+1 -yk)-eyk+1 ). For hk=floor(k/2), normalize only by Ahk +Bhk , omitting every term involving the metric-drift tail Dhk .Take the supremum over orbits with one fixed quadruple 0< m≤M, 0 < δ ≤1, and Λ ≥0 satisfying P 

> j

ηj ≤ Λ.Allow every norm-summable optimality-error sequence authorized by A6 and every noncommuting metric path au-thorized by A4-A5. Determine whether the established last-iterate tail mod-ulus remains universally finite after deleting the term that multiplies the remaining metric drift by the total increment energy. 

P044: Period-three tests under arbitrary delay switching Problem. x⋆ = ( b1 + b2 + b3)/3. For δ = ( δ0, δ 1, δ 2), δ ∞ is the delay word satisfying dk =

δkmod 3.At the start of round k, set uk 

> 10

= (cxk−1, c yk−1) if k≥1 and dk−1=0 and set it to zero otherwise; set uk 

> 20

=(cxk−2, c yk−2) if k ≥2 and dk−2=1 and set it to zero other-wise; set uk 

> 11

= ( cxk−1, c yk−1) if k ≥1 and dk−1=1 and set it to zero otherwise. Define Lkd = ( xk-x ⋆1, y k, z k-x ⋆1, h k-x⋆1, e kx, e ky , u k

> 10

, u k

> 20

, u k

> 11

) in this fixed order. 

Ed(k) is the maximum absolute value of the 24 scalar coordinates of Lkd .Frozen(q, α) holds when for every δ in {0,1} 3 there exist 

Cδ ≥1 and ρδ in (0,1) such that Eδ∞ (k) ≤ Cδ ρkδ Eδ∞ (0) for every b,x0 and k. Switched(q, α) holds when there exist C ≥1 and ρ in (0,1) such that Ed(k) ≤C ρkEd(0) for every b,x0,d and k. Agents are indexed modulo three, with successor s(i)=i+1 and predecessor p(i)=i-1. The primal channel uses half self-weight and half of the stored predecessor reconstruction, while the tracking channel retains half of an active agent’s post-delivery tracker mass and sends the other half to its successor. The computing agent at round k is ak=1+(k mod 3). Only 

ak performs a primal and gradient-difference computation; packet deliveries do not count as activations. At the end of round k, the active agent forms one paired packet Pk = ( ak,s( ak), c xk , c yk) and chooses dk in {0,1}; 

Pk is consumed at the start of round k+1+ dk, before that round’s computation. The delay word is an arbitrary element of {0,1} indexed by the nonnegative integers and need not be periodic. At the start of round k, Qk[0] and Qk[1] are multi-sets of packets scheduled for rounds k and k+1. Every packet in Qk[0] is delivered once and removed. After computation, the remaining queue is shifted and Pk is appended accord-ing to Qk+1 [0] = Qk[1] multiset-union { Pk if dk=0} and 

Qk+1 [1]={ Pk if dk=1}. The paired components share dk, no packet is consumed in its formation round, and packets on each edge are delivered FIFO. Let zkr be receiver r’s stored reconstruction of its pre-decessor’s primal state, hki sender i’s primal encoder ref-erence, and ex,k i , e y,k i sender i’s primal and tracking com-pression residuals. At the start of round k, for each re-ceiver r set bar zkr = zkr plus the sum of cx over packets in Qk[0] addressed to r, and bar ykr = ykr plus the cor-responding sum of cy . After these packets are consumed, set zk+1  

> r

=bar zkr for every r, so every delivered primal in-crement persists in the stored reconstruction. For i = ak

set xk+1  

> i

= (xki +bar zki )/2 − α bar yki and yk+1  

> i

=bar 

yki /2+[gradient fi(xk+1  

> i

)-gradient fi(xki )]; for j not equal to i set xk+1  

> j

= xkj and yk+1  

> j

=bar ykj . The active sender forms 

vxi = xk+1  

> i

− hki + ex,k i , c xk = qv xi , e x,k +1  

> i

= vxi − cxk , and 

hk+1  

> i

= hki +cxk , together with vyi =bar yki /2+ ey,k i , c yk = qv yi ,and ey,k +1  

> i

= vyi − cyk. All inactive encoder references and residuals remain unchanged, and Pk is inserted into the shifted queue exactly as prescribed in A3. Each objective is fi(x) = ( x − bi)2/2 on the real line, where the offsets bi are arbitrary, and the target optimizer is x⋆ = ( b1 + b2 + b3)/3. The stepsize α is constant and positive and q belongs to (0,1]. Initial primal states are arbitrary; y0 

> i

= x0 

> i

− bi, z 0 

> i

=

x0

> p(i)

, h 0 

> i

= x0 

> i

, both residuals are zero, and Q0[0] and Q0[1] are empty. This generation studies a conditional frozen-to-switched stability principle, not the previous unconditional parameter rectangle. It asks whether the special reachable structure of the specified 24-coordinate recurrence prevents the joint-product instability that individual stable monodromies do not exclude in general. The parameters satisfy 1/2 ≤ q ≤ 1 and 0 < α < 1/2. The premise requires geometric exact convergence for all eight delay words obtained by periodically repeating a block 

δ in {0,1} 3.The conclusion is uniform over every infinite delay word d in {0,1} N0 , with constants independent of d, the offsets, and the primal initialization. Both frozen stability and switched failure are evaluated on trajectories generated from A6 initialization, and every failure must affect a declared lifted coordinate. For the recurrence fixed by A1-A6 and every q in [1/2,1] and α in (0,1/2), determine whether geometric exact conver-gence for each of the eight periodically repeated three-round delay blocks implies delay-word-uniform geometric conver-gence over the entire binary delay language. 

P045: The positive lobe of a smoothed LCP map Problem. The feasible cells occur cyclically as empty, {1}, {1,3}, {1,2,3}, {2,3}, {2}. Writing rη =2/(1-η) and 

dη =4eta/((1-η)(1+2eta)), their gradients are respectively (0,0), (2,0), (0,-rη ), (−dη , −dη ), (−rη ,0), and (0,2). 

Pη = Gη (R2) intersected with (0 , ∞)2.For 0 < t< 2, b η (t)=sup({y >0: there exists z in R2 with 

Gη (z)=(t,y)}), with supremum zero when the set is empty. 

F ib η (q) = {zin R2 : Gη (z) = q}

C+ 

> η

={z in R2 : Gη (z) is in (0 , ∞)2 and det( DG η (z))=0}. A point z is a nondegenerate fold when DG η (z) has rank one and the directional derivative of det( DG η ) along any nonzero vector in ker( DG η (z)) is nonzero. 

Γη is the closed polygonal loop through the cyclic gra-dients (0,0), (2,0), (0,-rη ), (−dη , −dη ), (−rη ,0), (0,2), and back to (0,0). 

ρη =(1-2eta)/(1+2eta) is the positive-p inner fan-ray slope and tends to zero as η increases to 1/2. The leader variable is x in R2. Let B be the 3 by 2 matrix with rows (1,0), (0,1), and (1,1). For a fixed η in (0,1/2), let 

Mη be the symmetric 3 by 3 matrix with diagonal entries 1 and off-diagonal entries η. The lower equilibrium is the unique uη (x) satisfying u ≥ 0, M η u-Bx ≥ 0, and ui(Mη u −

Bx )i=0 for i=1,2,3. The upper objective is Fq (x, u )=c dot u-q dot x with c=(2,2,-2) and q in R2. Because the lower solution is unique, the exact optimistic marginal is ϕη ,q(x)=c dot uη (x)-q dot x. Only feasible full-dimensional active-set cells of this LCP are used. On the relative interior of such a cell I, 

uI = Mη [I,I] −1BI x, inactive coordinates vanish, the defin-ing complementarity inequalities are strict, and the unshifted cell gradient is gI = BTI Mη [I,I] −1cI .The solution map uη and every ϕη ,q are globally con-tinuous, positively homogeneous, and piecewise linear with linear growth. Gaussian convolution is taken with a standard two-dimensional Gaussian, so Gη (z)=E[ ∇(c dot uη )(z+Z)] is finite and fan faces are null sets. The transfer question uses ε decreasing to zero and x = ε

z with z in a fixed compact set. Membership q in Gη (R2), an omitted point q in relint( Dη ), strict directional descent of ϕη ,q at zero, and an exact zero of the finite-ε smoothed gradient are distinct predicates. The single coupled LCP in A1-A5, every η in (0,1/2), finite shifts z in R2, and outputs with both coordinates strictly positive. The target classifies the positive image, its complete finite fibers, and its critical boundary. It excludes the full-plane critical locus, product surrogates, metric projections, and the established diagonal-fold and central-fiber results. Only q in (0 , ∞)2 and finite solutions of Gη (z)=q are classified. All cells, gradients, recession limits, and Jacobian jumps must arise from the same Mη .The points (2,0) and (0,2) are limiting endpoints of the boundary graph and are not asserted to be attained at finite shifts. Fiber multiplicity counts distinct finite preimages, and ev-ery claimed regular preimage must have nonzero Jacobian determinant. For every η in (0,1/2), define Pη = Gη (R2) inter-sected with (0 , ∞)2, b η (t)=sup(y>0: there exists z in R2 with 

Gη (z)=(t,y)), and F ib η (q)=z in R2 : Gη (z)=q. Prove or re-fute the following conjunction: bη is positive, continuous, strictly decreasing, involutive, and has endpoint limits 2 and 0; Pη is exactly the subgraph 0< q2 ≤ bη (q1) over 0< q1<2; every value strictly below this graph has exactly two nonsin-gular preimages of opposite determinant signs; every value on the graph has exactly one preimage, which is a nonde-generate fold; and the complete positive critical set is one embedded curve mapped bijectively onto that graph. 

P046: An explicit PL threshold for a scalar exact penalty Problem. q(x)=max{p(x),0} and P hi r (x)=f(x)+r q(x). B= η+f(xbar)-min x∈U f(x), L = max x∈U ∥∇ f(x) ∥, and T=max{ rex (U ),B/ τ ,L/ σ}. At every positive-gap point, Qr (x)=dist(0,partial 

P hi r (x)) 2/[2( P hi r (x)-f(xbar))]. The assertion rP L (U, η ) ≤T means that for every ε > 0some μ > 0 satisfies Qr (x) ≥ μ for all r ≥T+ ε and all positive-gap band points. The ambient space is finite-dimensional Euclidean space. A fixed compact neighborhood U contains xbar in its in-terior. The maps f: Rn to R and P: Rn to Rm are C2 on a neighborhood of U, with fixed bounds on their first and sec-ond derivatives. The feasible set is C={x:P(x) in Rm 

> −

}. The point xbar is a local constrained minimizer, and S={x in C intersect U:f(x)=f(xbar)} is nonempty. Feasible quadratic growth holds on C intersect U: f(x) ≥f(xbar)+( α/2)dist (x, S )2 for a fixed α > 0. A fixed residual error bound holds throughout U: dist(x,C) ≤ κ dist(P(x), Rm 

> −

) for a fixed κ.A height η> 0 is fixed before selecting r. Within U there is no feasible point x with 0 < f(x)-f(xbar) ≤η satisfying 0 in ∇

f(x)+ NC (x), where NC is the limiting normal cone. For r >0 define P hi r (x)=f(x)+r dist(P(x), Rm 

> −

). Define 

rex (U ) as the infimum of r such that P hi r (x) ≥f(xbar) for every x in U. Define rP L (U, η ) as the infimum of r0 ≥ rex (U ) for which some μ > 0 satisfies dist(0,partial 

P hi r (x)) 2 ≥2mu( P hi r (x)-f(xbar)) for every r ≥r0 and ev-ery x in U with 0 < P hi r (x)-f(xbar) ≤η, where partial is the limiting subdifferential. One smooth scalar inequality p(x) ≤0 with q(x)=max{p(x),0}, a fixed compact neighborhood U, and a uniform residual-gradient lower bound σ on the exterior tube 0 ≤p≤ τ . This seeks an explicit multiplier-geometric threshold and is strictly stronger than the established instancewise finiteness result. The constraint dimension is m=1, P=p is scalar-valued, C={x:p(x) ≤0}, and q(x)=dist(p(x), R−)=max{p(x),0}. There are fixed τ > 0 and σ > 0 such that ∥∇ p(x) ∥≥ σ

for every x in U satisfying 0 ≤p(x) ≤ τ .Set B= η+f(xbar)-min x∈U f(x), L = max x∈U ∥∇ f(x) ∥,and T=max{ rex (U ),B/ τ ,L/ σ}. The inequality rP L (U, η ) ≤T is interpreted through threshold infima: for every ε > 0 the modulus may depend on the complete instance and ε but must be uniform for all r≥T+ ε.Prove or refute that for every scalar C2 inequality in-stance in KST , the explicit threshold T=max rex (U ),B/ τ ,L/ σ,where B= η+f(xbar)-min U f and L = max U ∥∇ f∥, satisfies 

rP L (U, η ) ≤T. Equivalently, for every ε>0 there is a posi-tive modulus valid simultaneously for all r ≥T+ ε on the fixed neighborhood and band. 

H.3 Unresolved Problems 

P047: The four-step minimax gain Problem. En(instance, h ) = [f( xn)-f( x⋆ )]/(L D2), where 

xn is the final point of trajectory. 

Wn(h) = sup{ En(instance, h ): instance is admissible in any positive finite dimension}. 

Vn = inf {Wn(h) : hin Rn}

Hn = {hin Rn : Wn(h) = Vn}

Xn(h) is the set of admissible instances for which 

En(instance, h ) = Wn(h).

P4 is the proposition V4 < V 3.L>0 and D >0, and the ambient dimension d may be any positive finite integer. f: Rd → R is convex, differentiable, and L-smooth, attains its minimum at x⋆ , and the initial point satisfies ∥x0 − x⋆ ∥≤ D for at least one minimizer. For a horizon n, h = ( h0, . . . , hn−1) is any real scalar schedule fixed before observing gradients, and xt+1 = xt −

(ht/L) ∇ f( xt). Zero and negative entries are not excluded a priori. The method uses only the current gradient and the fixed scalar schedule: no momentum, memory variables, auxiliary sequences, line search, or adaptivity. For each h in Rn, W n(h) is the supremum of [f( xn)-f( x⋆ )]/(L D2) over the class in A1-A4 and all allowed finite dimensions, and Vn =∈ fh∈Rn Wn(h); neither the infimum nor any supremum is assumed to be attained. Only horizons 3 and 4 for the unrestricted fixed real scalar schedules and finite-dimensional smooth-convex instances of A1-A5 are in scope; horizon 3 is used solely as the sharp comparator for the four-step cell. Every strictness or equality certificate must compare V4

with the exact V3; the chapter-reported silver coefficient r2

may be used only as an upper bound for one three-step sched-ule. Upper certificates and lower obstructions must cover all positive finite dimensions and all convex differentiable L-smooth objectives allowed by A2, not only quadratics or one-dimensional functions. No minimizer of W4 and no max-imizer defining W4(h) may be assumed. Relevant suprema are W4(h) for h in H4 and any W3(g) used in a sharp V3 com-parison. A numerical optimizer or floating-point SDP gap is diagnostic only; the final comparison and characterization require exact inequalities, exact algebraic data, or rigorously bounded rational certificates. The required classification is 

H4 and extremal data at its schedules; no arbitrary-horizon or asymptotic silver-optimality claim is requested. Under A1-A5, decide whether the exact four-step minimax value satisfies V4 < V 3. Separately determine the attainment branch for H4 = h in R4 : W4(h) = V4: if H4 is nonempty, characterize H4 exactly and, for every h in H4, give an ex-act finite interpolation description of at least one admissible instance attaining W4(h); if H4 is empty, characterize an explicit minimizing schedule sequence and corresponding asymptotically extremal instances. The comparator is the ex-act V3, not the reported silver-schedule coefficient. 

P048: Cost variation within an exact schedule profile Problem. For r0=0 and rt+1 = rt + st, set Abar t =

Art+st−1. . . Art and 

Bbar t = Brt+st−1 . . . B rt

Ht is generated by ε, g, the declared constants, the full de-terministic schedule S, the initial pair ( x0, y 0), and all com-pleted records ( su, α u, x u+1 , y u+1 ) for 0 ≤u< t. The controls 

st and αt are selected from Ht before macro-update t. A stopping decision at T is made only after update T-1 and is measurable with respect to HT .After the Ht-measurable controls are fixed, the macro-update is 

xt+1 = Abar txt − αtyt, yt+1 = Bbar tyt + ∇

F( xt+1 ) − ∇ F( xt). 

gκ(ε) = 1 + ceil (κ log(1 /ε )) 

CS (ε,g) is the infimum, over policies satisfying A5 and SC5 that halt after T ≥1 with T+1 ≤g and attain max i | xTi -x⋆ |≤ ε on every normalized instance, of the supremum over those instances of PT −1 

> t=0

st. Set CS (ε,g)= ∞ if no such policy exists. Define the profile 

E(S) = ( n, q, a, b, D, ϕ min , ψ min ,γA, γ B , ω min ),

with the periodic Perron sequences and projected Euclidean descriptors defined exactly in A7. The triple (S, S′, ε ) is active when E(S)=E( S′)=E0 and both CS (ε, g κ(ε)) and CS, ′(ε, g κ(ε)) are finite and strictly positive. For an active triple, 

R(S, S ′, ε ) = max {CS (ε, g κ(ε)) /C S, ′(ε, g κ(ε)) ,CS, ′(ε, g κ(ε)) /C S (ε, g κ(ε))}. There are n ≥3 agents using deterministic exact local gra-dients in dimension p ≥1. Each local objective fi is continuously differentiable, has L-Lipschitz gradient, and is μ-strongly convex; the average objective has unique optimizer x⋆ , and the local objectives need not share x⋆ .The schedule is indexed from the fixed phase k=0 and is periodic with a declared class period q. At every round the positive support graph is strongly connected and contains every self-loop. At round k, Ak is row-stochastic and Bk is column-stochastic. Their positive supports realize the declared round graph, and every positive entry is at least the fixed class bounds a >0 and b >0, respectively. Under A3 these self-looped irreducible factors have primitive q-step products. Every macro-update follows exactly the recurrence in 

central object . One communication round applies Ak and 

Bk simultaneously, and one gradient refresh evaluates all lo-cal gradients at the new primal state. Each block length and stepsize is selected from the schedule and the information available through the current macro-update. A policy halting after T completed macro-updates is admissible for budget g only if T+1 ≤g on every run; it may leave budget unused, and it may halt only after a macro-update. Every schedule is compared on the same normalized objective and initialization class: max i norm( x0 

> i

-x ⋆) =1, max i norm( ∇fi(x ⋆)) ≤H for fixed finite H, and y0 

> i

=

∇fi(x0 

> i

). The order is infimum over admissible policies fol-lowed by supremum over this class; successful policies and finite costs are not assumed. Relative to the fixed phase and declared q,a,b, define 

ϕ and ψ as the unique normalized q-periodic absolute-probability sequences satisfying ϕTk+1 Ak = ϕTk , B kpsi k =

psi k+1 , ϕ Tk 1 = 1 , 1T psi k = 1 , ϕ k+q = ϕk, and psi k+q =

psi k. Set 

P Ak = I − 1ϕT 

> k

, P Bk = I − ψk1T,ϕmin = min  

> 0≤k<q, i

ϕk,i , ψmin = min  

> 0≤k<q, i

ψk,i .γA = max  

> 0≤k<q

P Ak+1 AkP Ak 2 ,γB = max  

> 0≤k<q

P Bk+1 BkP Bk 2 .ωmin = min  

> 0≤k<q

ϕT 

> k

ψk.D = max 0≤k<q diameter( Gk). The canonical tuple is E(S)=(n,q,a,b,D, ϕmin , psi min , γ A, γ B , ω min ), with exact coordinatewise equality required. Existence of a distinct matched-tuple pair is a witness obligation, not a premise. The frontier retains the anchor recurrence and normal-ized minimax objective class, specializes to n=3, p=1, and declared q=3, and restricts every schedule in both targets to the same explicitly noncommuting domain. Ratios are formed only where both minimax costs are finite and positive. Static q=1, fixed-block, fixed-frequency, single-trajectory, and finite-accuracy transient discrepancies are excluded from the claimed contribution. Fix n=3, p=1, and declared q=3. Every schedule consid-ered must have phases i,j in {0,1,2} for which AiAj is not equal to Aj Ai or BiBj is not equal to Bj Bi.Every compared pair must satisfy exact coordinatewise equality E(S)=E( S′) for the fixed phase and declared class values of q, a, and b. A multiplicative ratio is admissible only at points where 0< C S (ε, g κ(ε)) < ∞ and 0 < C S, ′(ε, g κ(ε)) < ∞.Every cost retains the infimum over deterministic schedule-aware causal variable-block policies followed by the supremum over the full normalized objective and initial-ization class. At the beginning of macro-update t, the policy selects an integer st ≥1 and a finite scalar αt in [0, ∞), both measurable with respect to the pre-update history Ht; neither choice may depend on xt+1 , y t+1 , or the gradient refresh performed during macro-update t. For three-agent, scalar, declared period-three directed AB/Push-Pull schedules, determine whether the policy-optimized communication-cost profiles on every exact canonical-tuple fiber have uniformly bounded multiplicative diameter on some terminal accuracy interval. Equivalently, decide whether temporal order omitted by E(S) can produce arbitrarily large active cost ratios at accuracies tending to zero while the entire tuple and all objective scales remain fixed. 

P049: Rate distortion under tracker reordering Problem. Write Pj =(A, Bj ), S=( P0, P 1, P 2), and S’=( P0, P 2, P 1), with phase indices extended periodi-cally. For Pj =(A, Bj ), define Mj (α,H)=[[A,-αI 3],[H(A-

I3), B j − α H]], so zt+1 = Mj (α, H )zt.

M ono T,r (α,H) is the product of the three consecutive one-step maps for order T beginning at phase r, restricted to 

ZH .

Q3(T ) = ( q1(T ), q 2(T ), q 3(T )), where ql is the phase-maximized primal-or-tracker Dobrushin quantity from A5. 

β(T, H )=inf over stable α of ρ(M ono T, 0(α,H) | ZH ), and 

γ(T, H ) = β(T, H )(1 /3) .

Tslow is an order attaining γ+=max{ γ(S, H ), γ (S′, H )}, and Tf ast is the other order with 

γ−=min{ γ(S, H ), γ (S′, H )}. Rlead =(-log γ−)/(-log γ+). For positive stable rates, Rlead 

is the limit as ε tends to zero of 

Cε(Tslow , H )/C ε(Tf ast , H )

Cε(T, H ) is exactly the optimized phase-uniform Eu-clidean tail complexity on ZH defined in A6. There are n ≥3 agents and a deterministic periodic sched-ule of period p. Every graph has self-loops, and every cyclic block of W consecutive graphs has a strongly connected union. At time t, At is graph-compatible and row-stochastic, Bt is graph-compatible and column-stochastic, and every positive entry of either matrix is at least η> 0. The recursion is xt+1 = Atxt −αy t and yt+1 = Btyt +∇

F( xt+1 ) − ∇ F( xt), with y0 = ∇ F( x0) and one communi-cation round per iteration. Local objectives are scalar quadratics fi(x) = hi(x −

ci)2/2 with μ ≤ hi ≤L. When two schedules are compared, the diagonal Hessian H, centers c, and optimizer x⋆ are identical; the positive branch permits a fixed heterogeneous H, while the negative branch ranges over this Hessian class. Compared schedules are noncyclic orderings of the same 

p mixing pairs and have identical n, p, W, η and graph union. For row-stochastic P , define 

τ (P ) = 12 max  

> i,j

∥e⊤ 

> i

P − e⊤ 

> j

P ∥1

and 

ql(S) = max  

> 0≤r<p

max τ (Ar+l−1 · · · Ar ),τ (( Br+l−1 · · · Br )⊤) ,

with indices modulo p. The positive branch requires equal-ity of the exact qW values, not equality of analytical upper bounds, and restricts candidates to genuinely nonsymmetric directed pairs not related by a node permutation followed by a cyclic phase shift. Let z = ( u, v ) = ( x − 1x⋆, y ) and ZH = {(u, v ) : 

1⊤v = 1⊤Hu }. This subspace is invariant under exact ini-tialization. A stepsize α > 0 is stable when every phase-p error map restricted to ZH has spectral radius below 1. With 

ΦS,r (m, 0; α, H ) denoting m-round evolution from phase 

r, C ε(S, H ) is the minimum over stable α of the least k such that 

max  

> 0≤r<p

sup  

> z∈ZH
> z̸=0

sup 

> m≥k

∥ΦS,r (m, 0; α, H )z∥2

∥z∥2

≤ ε;

it is ∞ if no stable α exists. The positive branch of A1-A6 with n=p=W=3, η=1/8, μ=1, L=4, H=diag(1,2,4), zero centers, individual-round counting, and the Euclidean operator norm on ZH . The primal matrix is fixed across phases and strictly dominates every tracker-product Dobrushin channel, so exact Q3 equality is shielded from tracker reordering. Unlike the accepted equal-rate addi-tive log-log problem, this frontier asks for unbounded lead-ing multiplicative distortion. Unlike the previous one-sided finite-time endpoint, every schedule in the target has positive optimized rate. Literature novelty remains unresolved be-cause the supplied source pack is empty and no independent retrieval route is available to this role. Fix n=p=W=3, η=1/8, μ=1, L=4, H=diag(1,2,4), c=0, 

x⋆ =0, and A=(1/8)[[5,2,1],[1,5,2],[2,1,5]] at every phase. Each Bj is a column-stochastic 3-by-3 matrix with en-tries in [1/8,3/4] and asymmetry margin max i,k | (Bj )ik −

(Bj )ki | at least 1/16. Distinct trackers satisfy ∥Bj −

Bk∥2 

> F

≥1/4096. For S=( B0, B 1, B 2) and S’=( B0, B 2, B 1), every node-permutation matrix Pi and cyclic shift s in {0,1,2} satisfy max_{t in {0,1,2}} ∥BSt − P i T BS′

> t+s

Pi ∥2 

> F

≥1/4096. For T in {S,S’}, l in {1,2,3}, and every starting phase r, 

τ (( BTr+l−1 . . . B Tr )T ) ≤ τ (Al)-1/100. Both orders have nonempty stable-stepsize sets and op-timized per-round restricted spectral rates satisfying 0 <γ(T, H ) <1. No assertion about literature novelty is part of the mathe-matical target. For three-agent period-three directed push-pull schedules with one fixed primal mixing matrix and three reordered tracker matrices, determine whether equality of the com-plete exact profile Q3 can coexist with arbitrarily large lead-ing communication-complexity ratios while both globally optimized restricted spectral rates remain strictly positive. 

P050: A memory-dependent stability switch Problem. For each phase first form Hx = (1 − q)hx+qx and Hy = (1 − q)hy +qy. In phase zero use the preceding pair ( hx, h y ) in the A0 and B0 mixing terms; in phase one use ( Hx, H y ). Apply A5 and store ( Hx, H y ), defining maps 

T0(q,a,b, α) and T1(q,a,b, α) on R8.Define Md(q,a,b, α) = T1(q, a, b, α )T0(q,a,b, α). Let I={(x0,x0-r, 02, 02): x0,r in R2} and K(M)=span{ M jv :v in I and 0 ≤j≤7}. Let o=( 12, 02, 12, 02) and O=span{o}; remove only K(M) intersect O from the reachable space. For s=(x,y, hx, h y ), set J(s) = 1 T (y−x). The monodromy M is tracker-reachably Schur stable when O is contained in K(M), Mo=o, J(Ms)=J(s) on K(M), and the induced map on K(M)/O has spectral radius strictly less than one. Let S(q,a,b) be the positive α for which Md(q,a,b, α) is tracker-reachably Schur stable. If S(q,a,b) has a connected component C(q,a,b) whose closure contains zero, define 

α⋆(q, a, b )=sup C(q,a,b) when this supremum is finite and positive. Define Max(q)={(a,b) in [1/4,3/4] 2 : α⋆(q, a, b )=max 

α⋆(q, a′, b ′), where the maximum ranges over ( a′, b ′) in [1/4,3/4] 2}. There are two agents with scalar objectives fi(z) =(z − ri)2/2 for arbitrary real offsets r1 and r2; the aggre-gate minimizer is ( r1 + r2)/2. Communication alternates with period two. At even rounds use A0=[[1,0],[a,1-a]] and B0=[[1-b,0],[b,1]]; at odd rounds use A1=[[1-a,a],[0,1]] and B1=[[1,b],[0,1-b]], where a and b belong to [ η,1-η] for a fixed η in (0,1/2]. The phase delays are d2m = δ0 and d2m+1 = δ1 with 

δ0, δ 1 in {0,1}; histories required at index -1 are initialized to zero. The principal frontier cell is ( δ0, δ 1)=(1,0). For q in (0,1], define the algorithmic memory-relaxation map Qq (v)=qv componentwise. With h−1 

> x

= h−1 

> y

=0, update 

hkx = hk−1 

> x

+ Qq (xk − hk−1 

> x

) and hky = hk−1 

> y

+ Qq (yk −

hk−1 

> y

). No information-loss or bit-compression interpretation is assumed. For a constant stepsize α > 0, first form the memories in A4 and then update xk+1 = xk + ( Ak − I)hk−dk 

> x

− αy k

and yk+1 = yk + ( Bk − I)hk−dk 

> y

+ ( xk+1 -r)-( xk-r), with 

y0 = x0-r. Every initial primal vector x0 in real two-space is allowed, and convergence or failure is evaluated only on states reach-able from the initialization and memory conventions in A3-A5. Use exactly A1-A6 with η=1/4, q in [1/4,1/2], (a,b) in [1/4,3/4] 2, and delay placement ( δ0, δ 1)=(1,0). Phase zero uses the preceding memories and phase one uses the newly formed memories. Stability is evaluated on the initial-ized reachable Krylov quotient after removing exactly the optimizer-family direction. Allow q in [1/4,1/2] and (a,b) in [1/4,3/4] 2.Fix ( δ0, δ 1)=(1,0) with the memory-before-mixing order of A4-A5. Use only modes in the Krylov span generated by A6 ini-tializations, and quotient only the fixed optimizer direction. Classify maximizers over the entire closed weight square, not merely among its four corners or on a sampled grid. Prove or refute the following fully quantified propo-sition. For every (q,a,b) in [1/4,1/2] x [1/4,3/4] 2,the connected-from-zero tracker-reachable stability com-ponent C(q,a,b) exists, its endpoint α⋆(q, a, b ) is fi-nite and positive, and α⋆ is continuous on the closed prism. Moreover, there exists a unique qc in (7/20,3/8) such that Max(q)=(3/4,1/4) for 1/4 ≤q< qc,Max( qc)=(3/4,1/4),(1/4,1/4), and Max(q)=(1/4,1/4) for 

qc<q ≤1/2. 

P051: Exact four-query regret with bounded bias Problem. W(A;L, β) is the supremum over f in 

DOBJECT IV ES and b in DBIASES of f( bxA) − min x∈[0 ,1] 

f(x). 

R4(L, β ) = ∈ fA∈DALGORIT HM S W (A; L, β )

Agrid queries qi=(2i-1)/8 for i=1,2,3,4 and returns a queried point having the smallest observed value. The domain is [0,1] with its usual distance, L >0, and 0< β ≤L/16. The unknown objective f:[0,1] → R is L-Lipschitz, with no convexity, smoothness, or derivative information assumed. Each query x returns y(x)=f(x)+b(x), where b:[0,1] → R is one fixed unknown function satisfying | b(x) |≤ β everywhere and has no further regularity. An algorithm is deterministic, makes at most four adap-tively selected evaluations, and may return any transcript-dependent point of [0,1], whether queried or unqueried. 

R4(L, β) is the infimum over such algorithms of the supre-mum of f(x ˆ)-min x∈[0 ,1] f(x) over all pairs (f,b) satisfying A2 and A3. One-dimensional L-Lipschitz global optimization on [0,1] with one fixed arbitrary bias field bounded by β, at most four deterministic adaptive evaluations, and a recommenda-tion that may be queried or unqueried. The task is the exact minimax equality in the stated small-bias cell; randomized algorithms, regular bias fields, higher query budgets, and asymptotic rates are excluded. The evaluation budget is at most four and the parameter range is L >0 and 0 < β ≤L/16. Repeated evaluation of a point returns the same value f(x)+b(x), and b need not be continuous or regular. The final recommendation may be any transcript-dependent point of [0,1]. Determine whether R4(L, β)=L/8+2 β for every L>0 and 0< β ≤L/16 under the deterministic, adaptive, unrestricted-recommendation oracle model of A1-A5. 

P052: Adaptation to an unknown tail index Problem. 

f (x) = n−1

> n

X

> i=1

fi(x), P hi (x) = f (x) + r(x)

η=1/(2L) and Pη (x) = η−1[x-prox ηr (x-η ∇ f(x))]. 

Rp(T ; n, L, ∆) =inf over A in Alg p(T ) of sup over d ≥1and I in Ip(d; n, L, ∆) of EI [∥Pη (XAT )∥]. 

Mp(ε; n, L, ∆) = inf T ∈ Z≥0 : Rp(T ; n, L, ∆) 

≤ ε .TB (p, ε;n,L, ∆)=inf{T in nonnegative integers: sup over d≥1 and I in Ip(d; n, L, ∆) of EI [∥Pη (XBT )∥]≤ ε}. 

Λ = log( e + n + L∆/ε 2)

Let d be arbitrary and finite, n ≥2, L >0, ∆>0, and p0 in (1,2). Each fi : Rd → R is differentiable and L-smooth but may be nonconvex; r is proper, closed, convex, and has a computable proximal map. The objective Φ( x) = n−1 P 

> i

fi(x)+r(x) is bounded be-low, and the supplied initial point x0 satisfies Φ( x0) -inf 

Φ ≤∆.For each p in [p0,2], Ip consists of instances whose query (i,x) returns ∇fi(x)+ξ with E[ ξ| history,i,x]=0 and E[ ∥ξ∥p |

history,i,x] ≤1. Noises are fresh and conditionally indepen-dent across calls, with no shared-noise component-difference access, cross-point coupling, or oracle-increment regularity. An admissible T-query algorithm is a dimension-indexed randomized family that adaptively selects component indices and query points from its transcript and outputs XT . All algorithms know n,L, ∆,p0,r and x0; the p-aware families defining Mp additionally know p, while the single family B does not. The guarantee is required separately over every nested class Ip and does not posit a latent identifiable p. Let η=1/(2L), f = n−1 P 

> i

fi, and Pη (x) = η−1[x-

prox ηr (x-η ∇ f(x))]. Accuracy is E[ ∥Pη (XT )∥]≤ ε for 0< ε < √(L ∆), Λ means log(e+n+L ∆/ε2), the permitted slack is exactly Λ2, and the investigated noise-dominated tuples satisfy 0 < M p(ε;n,L, ∆)< ∞ and Mp(ε;n,L, ∆)≥4n. Centralized finite-sum composite optimization under A1-A5. The performance criterion is worst-case expected proximal-gradient norm. Oracle noises are fresh and point-wise, with no shared-noise component differences or cross-point regularity. The question concerns simultaneous nested-class risk rather than identification of a latent tail index. Performance is measured by E[ ∥Pη (XT )∥], never by an expected squared norm. Queries provide only fresh pointwise noisy component gradients; paired component differences and cross-point noise coupling are unavailable. The comparison is required only when 0 < M p(ε;n,L, ∆)

< ∞ and Mp(ε;n,L, ∆) ≥ 4n, with slack exactly Λ2.For every p0 in (1,2), determine whether there exist one anytime admissible algorithm family B, not told p, and a finite constant C depending only on p0 such that TB (p, ε) ≤

C Λ2Mp(ε;n,L, ∆) simultaneously for every p in [p0,2] and every admissible tuple satisfying 0 < Mp < ∞ and Mp ≥

4n. 

P053: The adaptive query threshold on the square Problem. At query xt after history ht−1, the report is 

yt=f( xt)+E( xt, h t−1). The simple regret of x ˆ is R(f, x ˆ) =f(x ˆ)-min x∈X f(x). 

Nad is the least positive integer N for which some algo-rithm in AN guarantees R(f, x ˆ) ≤3L/8 for every f in FL and every E in OL/ 8.G consists of xij =((2i+1)/8,(2j+1)/8) for i,j in {0,1,2,3}; the index distance between xij and xkl is max{ | i-k |, | j-l |}. For q in S subset G, W14 (S, q ) holds at | S|=14 ex-actly when every point of G outside S has index distance at most one from q. For | S|<14 it holds exactly when some x in G outside S satisfies both W14 (Sunion {x}, q )

and W14 (Sunion {x}, x ).Policy P14 first queries x00 . In state (S,q), where q is the earliest queried point having minimum report, it queries the lexicographically first x witnessing the recursion for 

W14 (S, q ). It replaces q by x exactly when the new report is strictly smaller, stops after fourteen queries, and recommends q. The search space is X=[0,1] d for a fixed positive integer d, equipped with the ∞ norm. The unknown objective f:X to R is globally L-Lipschitz for a known constant L >0. At query t the oracle returns yt=f( xt) + et, where the errors are supplied by one globally defined deterministic rule of the current query and preceding transcript, defined for every counterfactual history and repeated query, and satisfy 

| et |≤ β everywhere. The bias magnitude satisfies 0 < β < L/4. For a positive integer N, the algorithm is deterministic, may choose at most N queries adaptively from past obser-vations, and may recommend any point of X, queried or unqueried. Performance is worst-case simple regret f(x ˆ)-min X f with the non-strict success requirement f(x ˆ)-min X f≤ ε, where 0< ε < L/2. The domain is [0,1] 2 with the ∞ norm. The objective is any real-valued L-Lipschitz function for arbitrary L >0. A deterministic algorithm may choose each query from previ-ous reports, stop after at most N queries, and recommend any queried or unqueried point. One deterministic error rule de-fined on every query-history pair supplies errors bounded by L/8. Success is non-strict simple regret at most 3L/8. Fixed-only designs, randomized algorithms, stochastic noise, other parameter ratios, and other dimensions are excluded. Specialize to d=2, β=L/8, and ε=3L/8 for arbitrary L >0. Every query and the stopping decision may depend deter-ministically on the complete preceding report transcript. The bounded error rule must be defined on every counter-factual query-history pair, including repeated queries. The final recommendation may be queried or unqueried. Regret equal to 3L/8 is successful. Fix d=2, β=L/8, and ε=3L/8. Determine whether the de-terministic adaptive minimax evaluation complexity is ex-actly fourteen under globally defined transcript-dependent bounded corruption and unrestricted recommendations. 

P054: The fixed-design query threshold on the square Problem. At the t-th fixed query qt after history ht−1, the report is yt=f( qt)+E( qt, h t−1). The simple regret of x ˆ is R(f, x ˆ) =f(x ˆ)-min x∈X f(x). 

Nf ix is the least positive integer N for which some design in DN guarantees R(f, x ˆ) ≤3L/8 for every f in FL and every E in OL/ 8.G={1/8,3/8,5/8,7/8} 2 is the sixteen-point tensor grid in X. The search space is X=[0,1] d for a fixed positive integer d, equipped with the ∞ norm. The unknown objective f:X to R is globally L-Lipschitz for a known constant L >0. At query t the oracle returns yt=f( xt) + et, where the errors are supplied by one globally defined deterministic rule of the current query and preceding transcript, defined for every counterfactual history and repeated query, and satisfy 

| et |≤ β everywhere. The bias magnitude satisfies 0 < β < L/4. For a positive integer N, the algorithm is deterministic, may choose at most N queries adaptively from past obser-vations, and may recommend any point of X, queried or unqueried. Performance is worst-case simple regret f(x ˆ)-min X f with the non-strict success requirement f(x ˆ)-min X f≤ ε, where 0< ε < L/2. The domain is X=[0,1] 2 with the ∞ norm. The objective is any real-valued L-Lipschitz function, where L >0. Query locations must be fixed before any reports are observed, although they are queried sequentially under one globally defined history-dependent error rule bounded by L/8. The deterministic recommendation may be any report-dependent point of X. The target is the exact fixed-design query count for non-strict simple regret at most 3L/8; adaptive placement, randomized algorithms, stochastic noise, other dimensions, and fixed spatial-bias restrictions are excluded. Specialize to d=2, β=L/8, and ε=3L/8 for arbitrary L >0. All query locations are chosen before reports are observed, but the recommendation is an arbitrary deterministic function of the complete report vector. The error rule is defined and bounded on every query-history pair, including counterfactual histories and repeated locations. Success means simple regret at most 3L/8, including equality. Fix d=2, β=L/8, and ε=3L/8. Determine whether the de-terministic fixed-design minimax evaluation complexity is exactly sixteen when reports have globally defined transcript-dependent bounded errors and the recommendation may de-pend on all reports and be unqueried. 

P055: A sharp residual threshold for moving HJB selec-tors Problem. 

Rn = δ(1 /6)  

> n

, a n = R2

> n

, , cn = γRn/a n

For the fixed canonical model, V=0, Hv [V]=0, Hr [V]= x2,and GV = x2.For a closed-loop solution X, τ0(X)=inf{t ≥ 0 : Xt=0}, with inf (emptyset ) = ∞.For a specified candidate sequence w, P wn (λ) is the supre-mum of P( τ0(X) ≤T) over every A6-authorized feedback and every corresponding weak solution with X0 = λRn.

Fn(t, x )=integral from 0 to x of (x−y)y2 k((y-cn t)/ an)dy. Set wn = Fn for x ≤ 2Rn. For z=(x-2Rn)/a n in [0, Lcut ], define wn(t, 2Rn + anz ) as the unique polynomial of degree at most five whose value and first two z-derivatives at z=0 are Fn, a n(Fn)x, and a2

> n

(Fn)xx , and whose value and first two z-derivatives at z = Lcut are zero. Set wn=0 for x ≥

2Rn + Lcut an.A critical template includes one specified Borel feedback which selects r on raw-region phase plateaus where k((x-

cn t)/ an)=-2 and selects an εn-minimizing action elsewhere, including throughout the Hermite transition. A critical template is valid if its profile and Hermite data satisfy SC cutof f,bounds , its candidate satisfies A4-A5 with 

δn = R6 

> n

and εn ≤ Kcrit R3 

> n

for one fixed Kcrit , and its specified feedback satisfies A6. For a valid critical template q and C > 0, Q n(q, C ) is the infimum of P( τ0(X) ≤min{ CR n,T}) over all weak solutions corresponding to q’s specified feedback with X0 = Rn. This set is nonempty by A1. Fix T >0, D=(0,1), and U={v,r}. Under action a, dX t =

ba(t, Xt)dt+ σa(t, X t)dW t. The coefficients are bounded and continuous on [0,T] times [0,1], locally Lipschitz in x on D, and every tested Borel feedback admits at least one weak solution up to the exit time τ from D. There are r0, c 0, C 0, s 0 >0 such that for x < r 0, b v (t, x ) ≥

c0 and | σv (t, x ) |≤ C0 x, while | σr (t, x ) |≥ s0. For x> 1−r0 and both actions, ba(t, x ) ≤ − c0 and | σa(t, x ) |≤ 

C0(1 − x). Thus the upper boundary has an explicit action-uniform invariance condition and only the lower boundary distinguishes v from r. Running costs la and terminal cost g are bounded and con-tinuous. The finite-horizon state-constrained value V extends spatially as a C2,α function on [0, r0] for a fixed α in (0,1], solves Vt + min a Ha[V]=0 in the lower collar, and has exact gap GV (t, x ) = Hr

V

(t,x)-Hv

V

(t,x) satisfying c−xp ≤ GV (t, x ) ≤ c+xp for fixed p, c−, c + >0. Here Ha[z]= la + bazx + (1 /2) σ2

> a

zxx .Candidates wn are bounded C1,2 functions with εn, δ n

tending to zero and satisfy sup t<T,x ∈D | (wn)t +min a Ha[wn] |≤ εn, sup t,x | wn-V |≤ δn, and sup x |

wn(T, x )-g(x) |≤ εn.For one fixed M< ∞, sup n sup t

∥wn(t, . )∥{C2,α ([0 , r 0])}+ sup t ∥V(t,.) ∥{C2,α ([0 , r 0])} ≤M. The stopped Ito families required for later cost comparison are uniformly integrable. For every n, u n is any Borel feedback satisfying 

Hun(t,x )[wn]( t, x ) ≤ min  

> a

Ha[wn]( t, x ) + εn.

All viability and exit conclusions quantify over every weak closed-loop solution under un; the unstopped cost is con-sidered only after lower- and upper-boundary viability have been established. One fixed finite-horizon one-dimensional model satisfy-ing A1-A6, with α=1 and p=2. The upper assertion ranges over all A4 candidate sequences, all A6-authorized Borel feedbacks, and all corresponding weak solutions. A critical template includes a specified authorized feedback, and its exit probability is the infimum over all corresponding weak solutions. The moving wave has a precisely defined spatial cutoff and no terminal cutoff. Fix a smooth function θ on [0,1] with θ=0 on [0,1/4] and 

θ=1 on [3/4,1]. Set bv =1-2theta, br =-θ, σv =(1-θ)x+ θ(1-x), 

σr =(1-θ)+ θ(1-x), lv = 0 , l r = x2, and g=0. Let δn >0 tend to zero, Rn = δ(1 /6)  

> n

, and an = R2

> n

.The universal assertion assumes εn/R3 

> n

tends to zero. The upper assertion starts at Xn(0) = λRn for fixed λ > 0, while the critical construction starts at Xn(0) = Rn.A critical template uses a smooth one-periodic mean-zero function k with k ≥-2 and k=-2 on an interval of positive length, speed cn = γRn/a n, and raw wave Fn(t, x )=integral from 0 to x of (x−y)y2 k((y-cn t)/ an)dy for x ≤ 2Rn. Across [2Rn, 2Rn + Lcut an], w n is the unique degree-at-most-five Hermite polynomial matching Fn, a n(Fn)x, and a2

> n

(Fn)xx 

at the left endpoint and matching a zero two-jet at the right endpoint. Set wn=0 beyond that interval. A valid critical template has constants C0,. . . , C4 and CH

independent of n such that in the transition | wn |≤ C60R,n , |

(wn)x |≤ C41R,n , | (wn)xx |≤ C22R,n , the spatial Lipschitz seminorm of (wn)xx is at most C3, | (wn)t |≤ C34R,n , and 

(wn)xx ≥ − 2x2 − C3

> HR,n

.The moving wave is not multiplied by a terminal-time cutoff. In the fixed canonical two-action diffusion with exact value V=0, δn = R6

> n

, and interpolation width an = R2

> n

, prove or refute the conjunction of a universal subcritical exit bound and an existential critical moving-lattice construction, with all probabilities explicitly extremized over corresponding weak solutions. P056: Pointwise errors in variable-metric PDHG Problem. g⋆ denotes the Fenchel conjugate of g. T(x,y)=(partial f(x)+K y, partial g (y)-Kx), where K⋆ is the Hilbert adjoint of K. Set ek+1 = ( ex(k+1), ey (k+1)). With ∆ xk = xk+1 − xk and ∆ yk = yk+1 − yk, define 

wk+1 = ( K⋆ ∆ yk − Pk ∆ xk − ex(k+1), K ∆ xk − Qk ∆

yk − ey (k+1)); A3 gives wk+1 in T( xk+1 , y k+1 ). The error sequence is pointwise root-small when √(k+1)( ∥ex(k+1) ∥+∥ey (k+1) ∥)→0. X and Y are finite-dimensional real Hilbert spaces; f on X and g on Y are proper lower-semicontinuous convex func-tions, and K:X →Y is linear. The KKT operator T(x,y)=( ∂f(x)+K y, ∂g(y)-Kx) has a nonempty zero set. For every k, the iterates satisfy 0 ∈ ∂f( xk+1 )+K* yk +

Pk(xk+1 − xk) + exk+1 and 0 ∈ ∂g*( yk+1 )-K(2 xk+1 − xk) + 

Qk(yk+1 −yk)+ eyk+1 , so ex and ey are the declared inexact-resolvent optimality residuals. 

Pk and Qk are self-adjoint positive-definite block metrics with mI ≼ Pk, Q k ≼MI for fixed 0 < m≤M, and ∥Q(−1/2)  

> k

K

P (−1/2)  

> k

∥≤ 1 − δ for a fixed δ > 0. There are nonnegative ηk with P 

> k

ηk < ∞ such that 

(1 + ηk)(−1) Pk ≼ Pk+1 ≼ (1 + ηk)Pk and the same two-sided relation holds for Qk.The inexactness is norm-summable: P

> k

(∥ex(k+1) ∥+∥ey (k+1) ∥)< ∞.All finite-dimensional A1-A6 variable-metric PDHG data and their original last-iterate sequences. The observable is the selected graph-valid KKT element. No averaging, best-iterate selection, strong monotonicity, bounded-variation as-sumption, or restriction to quadratic objectives is permitted. At zk+1 = ( xk+1 , y k+1 ), use wk+1 =(K ⋆(yk+1 − yk) −

Pk(xk+1 −xk)−ex(k+1), K(x (k+1)-xk)−Qk(yk+1 −yk)−

eyk+1 ). The tested stratum satisfies √(k+1)( ∥ex(k+1) ∥+∥ey (k+1) ∥)→0 in addition to the norm summability already required by A6. The metrics may vary noncommutatively subject only to A4-A5; they need not become constant after finitely many iterations. The limit is taken along every original iterate k and not along a subsequence, average, or running minimum. Determine whether norm-summable optimal-ity errors satisfying the pointwise condition √(k+1)( ∥exk+1 ∥+∥eyk+1 ∥)→0 necessarily preserve the exact-method last-iterate law √(k+1) ∥wk+1 ∥→ 0 under all metric sequences allowed by A4-A5, without any bounded-variation or dyadic-tail hypothesis. 

P057: Heavy-tail minimax equivalence Problem. NC (ρ) = NC (1 /8; 1 , 3/2, 1, 1, 1, 1, ρ ) for C in {U,G}, with the argument order fixed by A8. 

dratio = {ρ > 0 : 0 < N G(ρ) < ∞} 

Leading-order equivalence holds when some rthreshold 

satisfies [ rthreshold , ∞) subset of dratio and, for every δ > 0, some R >0 satisfies 1-δ < N U (ρ)/N G(ρ) ≤1 for every 

ρ ≥ R.Fix an integer d ≥ 1, 1 < p < 2, 0 < μ ≤ L, R 0 >

0, σ ⋆ > 0, and 0 < ε < R 0/4. The decision space is 

Rd, ∥x0 − x⋆∥ ≤ R0, and no bounded-domain assumption is imposed. Each instance has g=f+ ϕ, where f is differentiable, L-smooth, and μ-strongly convex, while ϕ is proper, closed, and convex; consequently g has a unique minimizer x⋆ .For every declared positive step size η, an exact call to 

prox ηϕ is available and counts as one proximal call. For every adaptively selected query Qt and the σ-field 

Ft−1 generated by all earlier states, queries, oracle values, and internal randomness, the oracle sample Gt satisfies 

E[Gt | F t−1, Q t] = ∇f (Qt)

and 

(E [∥Gt − ∇ f (Qt)∥p | F t−1, Q t]) 1/p ≤ σ⋆ +σL∥Qt −x⋆∥.

Samples drawn after a fixed query are conditionally indepen-dent given that query and the past. The parameters d, p, L, μ, R0, σ∗, and σL are declared to algorithms, but x⋆ , the instance, and the oracle distribution are not. The occurrence of x⋆ in A1 and A4 defines the instance class and supplies no algorithmic side information. Class U consists of measurable state machines with arbi-trary standard-Borel persistent state. They may retain past oracle information, choose current or off-current queries adaptively, use robust estimation or clipping, and make ex-act proximal calls. Every oracle sample and proximal call consumes the common budgets. Class G is the precommitted geometric-median proximal template family. Before observing oracle values, an algo-rithm fixes a finite horizon T , positive step sizes ηt, positive batch sizes bt, and odd block counts kt dividing bt, as func-tions only of the declared parameters, with T ≤ M (ε). At round t, it draws bt samples at Xt, partitions them into kt

equal blocks, averages within blocks, selects a measurable Euclidean geometric median mt of the block averages, and sets 

Xt+1 = prox ηtϕ(Xt − ηtmt).

It returns XT , makes no off-current query, retains no auxil-iary oracle summary, performs no clipping, and adds no up-date term outside this prescribed template. Its oracle count is P 

> t

bt, and NG optimizes over every schedule allowed here. Let κ = L/μ and 

M (ε) = ⌈64 κ log( R0/ε )⌉ .

For C ∈ { U, G }, define NC as the infimum over algorithms 

A in class C using at most M (ε) proximal calls of the supre-mum over admissible instances P of A’s deterministic max-imum oracle-sample count, subject to 

sup 

> P

(EP ∥XA − x⋆P ∥p)1/p ≤ ε. 

Set NC = ∞ if no such algorithm exists. Study ρ = σL/μ 

tending to infinity with d, p, L, μ, R 0, σ ⋆, ε , and 64 fixed, and form NU /N G only where 0 < N G < ∞.Use the full instance and algorithm classes of A1-A8, specialized only to d=1, p=3/2, L = μ = R0 = σ∗ =1, ε =1/8, and σL = ρ. The comparison remains worst-case over every admissible composite objective and conditional oracle; neither class may receive the minimizer or oracle distribution. Set d=1, p=3/2, L = μ = R0 = σ∗ = 1 , ε =1/8, and 

σL = ρ with ρ > 0. Compute NU and NG using the complete classes and worst-case instance supremum in A6-A8, without restricting the oracle to a selected toy family. Compare the unnormalized complexities through 

NU (ρ)/N G(ρ); equality of polynomial exponents alone is insufficient. On the fixed ray d=1, p=3/2, L = μ = R0 = σ∗ =1, ε =1/8, and σL = ρ, determine whether the unrestricted class U and the precommitted geometric-median proximal class G have asymptotically equal minimax oracle com-plexities: the admissible ratio domain contains a tail and 

NU (ρ)/N G(ρ) tends to 1 as ρ tends to ∞.

P058: Intermediate-bias minimax regret Problem. For (f,b) ∈ FL × Bδ , define the fixed oracle 

yf,b (x)=f(x)+b(x). If bxA(f, b ) is A’s recommendation, define W(A;L, δ) = sup f ∈FL,b ∈Bδ [f( bxA(f, b )) − min x∈[0 ,1] f(x)]. 

Rn(1 , L, δ ) = ∈ fA∈Alg n W (A; L, δ )

Vn(L, δ)=min{L/2,L/(2n)+2 δ}. 

NL,δ (ε)=min{n ≥ 5 : Rn(1,L, δ) ≤ 2δ + ε}, when this set is nonempty. The domain is [0,1] d with the ℓ∞ metric, where d is a positive integer. The unknown objective f is real-valued and L-Lipschitz on the domain for a known constant L >0; no convexity, differentiability, or additional regularity is assumed. The oracle is the fixed map y(x)=f(x)+b(x), where b is chosen adversarially before the interaction and satisfies |

b(x) |≤ δ for every x, for a known δ ≥0; no regularity of b is assumed. The query budget n is a positive integer. An algorithm is deterministic, may choose each query from earlier returned values, uses at most n queries, and then recommends any point of the domain, whether queried or unqueried. Because y is one fixed map, repeated queries at the same point return the same value. For an algorithm A with recommendation x ˆA, its risk is 

sup f,b [f(x ˆA) − min x f(x)], with the supremum taken jointly over all pairs satisfying A2 and A3; Rn(d,L, δ) is the infimum of this risk over all algorithms satisfying A4. No gradients, randomized observations, distributional noise assumptions, or side information beyond d, L, δ, and returned biased values may be used. One-dimensional deterministic global minimization on [0,1] under A1-A6. This frontier covers the intermediate-bias region omitted by the established low-bias identity and excludes independently varying errors, queried-point-only recommendations, higher dimensions, and δ ≥L/4. Fix d=1 with metric | x-x’ | on [0,1]. The budget n is an arbitrary integer n ≥5. The bias radius satisfies L/(4n) < δ < L/4. The oracle is one fixed spatial map y=f+b, so repeated queries receive identical reports. The final recommendation may be queried or unqueried. Determine whether, for every L>0, inte-ger n≥5, and L/(4n)< δ<L/4, the exact identity 

Rn(1,L, δ)=minL/2,L/(2n)+2 δ holds under one fixed arbitrary bias field and an unrestricted final recommenda-tion. 

P059: Low-bias minimax regret Problem. For an admissible pair (f,b), the oracle is the fixed map yf,b (x)=f(x)+b(x). If bxA(f, b ) is A’s recommendation after interacting with yf,b , define W(A;L, δ) = sup f ∈FL,b ∈Bδ [f( bxA(f, b )) −

min x∈[0 ,1] f(x)]. 

Rn(1 , L, δ ) = ∈ fA∈Alg n W (A; L, δ )

The midpoint-grid algorithm queries qi=(2i-1)/(2n), i=1,. . . ,n, and recommends a queried point with minimum reported value, using a fixed deterministic tie rule. The domain is [0,1] d with the ℓ∞ metric, where d is a positive integer. The unknown objective f is real-valued and L-Lipschitz on the domain for a known constant L >0; no convexity, differentiability, or additional regularity is assumed. The oracle is the fixed map y(x)=f(x)+b(x), where b is chosen adversarially before the interaction and satisfies |

b(x) |≤ δ for every x, for a known δ ≥0; no regularity of b is assumed. The query budget n is a positive integer. An algorithm is deterministic, may choose each query from earlier returned values, uses at most n queries, and then recommends any point of the domain, whether queried or unqueried. Because y is one fixed map, repeated queries at the same point return the same value. For an algorithm A with recommendation x ˆA, its risk is 

sup f,b [f(x ˆA) − min x f(x)], with the supremum taken jointly over all pairs satisfying A2 and A3; Rn(d,L, δ) is the infimum of this risk over all algorithms satisfying A4. No gradients, randomized observations, distributional noise assumptions, or side information beyond d, L, δ, and returned biased values may be used. One-dimensional deterministic global minimization on [0,1] under A1-A6. The frontier concerns the entire general-budget phase n ≥5 with 0 ≤ δ ≤L/(4n), not an isolated low-budget cell, independently varying errors, queried-point-only recommendations, higher dimensions, or the saturated regime. Fix d=1 and use the absolute-value metric on [0,1]. The query budget n is an arbitrary finite integer satisfying n≥5. The bias radius satisfies 0 ≤ δ ≤L/(4n). For each instance, b is one globally defined field on [0,1], and repeated queries at one point return the same value. The recommendation may be any point of [0,1], whether queried or unqueried. Determine whether the exact identity 

Rn(1,L, δ)=L/(2n)+2 δ holds simultaneously for every finite integer n ≥5 and every 0 ≤ δ ≤L/(4n) under one fixed arbitrary bias field and an unrestricted final recommendation. 

P060: A topology exponent for directed gradient tracking Problem. For I in DFULL (η), z⋆ =(P3 

> j=1

hj rj )/(P3 

> j=1

hj ). 

Eαk = ( norm (xk − 1z⋆ )22 + α2norm (yk)22)(1 /2) 

Rk(I, α)=sup Eα/E 0 

> k

α over all tracker-consistent x0 with 

Eα 

> 0

>0. S(I)={ α > 0 : sup k≥0 Rk(I, α) < +∞ and 

lim k→+∞ Rk(I, α)=0}. 

Tε(I, α)=inf{K in {0,1,2,. . . }: sup k≥K Rk(I, α) ≤ ε}, with value + ∞ when the set is empty. 

NGT (ε;3,2, η)= sup I∈DFULL (η) ∈ fα∈S(I)Tε(I, α), with an empty inner infimum equal to + ∞.There are n ≥3 agents with scalar objectives fi(z) =

hi(z −ri)2/2, where 1 ≤ hi ≤2. Their average has the unique minimizer z⋆ , and ∇ F(x)=( hi(xi − ri)) ni=1 .For a constant α > 0, the algorithm is xk+1 = Akxk −αy k

and yk+1 = Bkyk + ∇ F( xk+1 ) − ∇ F( xk), with tracker-consistent initialization y0 = ∇ F( x0). Each Ak is row-stochastic and each Bk is column-stochastic. Both have positive diagonal entries, and for i ̸=j, 

(Ak)ij >0 if and only if (Bk)ij >0 if and only if the directed edge j →i is present at time k. Every positive entry of either matrix is at least η, where 0 < η ≤1/2. For a fixed integer H ≥1, the union of the directed graphs in every H consecutive times is strongly connected. An admissible instance I consists of the objective data and matrix schedule satisfying A1-A4, but not an initial-ization. For each I and α, E αk , Rk, T ε, S(I), and NGT are defined as in the claim shape, with Rk taking the supre-mum over all tracker-consistent x0 having Eα 

> 0

>0 and NGT 

taking the supremum over all admissible instances. An in-stance with S(I) empty makes NGT infinite. No finiteness or heterogeneity-control property of the chosen normalization is assumed. All scalar-quadratic objectives and all infinite matrix schedules satisfying A1-A5 with n=3, H=2, and 0 < η ≤1/3. Stepsizes are instance-aware, constant, and optimized over the tracker-reachable stability set S(I); no periodicity, com-mon Perron vector, or balancedness is imposed. Fix n=3 and H=2 but retain every admissible objective, support sequence, and communication weight sequence. For each instance, optimize over every α in S(I), with sta-bility and settling evaluated only through tracker-consistent envelopes. The same finite exponent and comparison constants must work for every sufficiently small η and ε.For the anchor-defined push-pull recursion with n=3 and H=2, determine whether the full admissible-class complexity 

NGT (ε;3,2, η) is uniformly comparable to η(−β) log(1/ ε) for some finite β ≥0 as η and ε tend to zero. 

P061: Strong-bias asymptotics for a single jump Problem. A query at x returns y(x)=f(x)+b(x), with the same f and fixed step b used for the entire transcript. 

Rstep N (L, δ) is the infimum over deterministic N-query al-gorithms of the supremum of f(x ˆ)-min x∈[0 ,1] f(x) over all instances authorized by A1-A4. 

SN (L) = sup 

> δ≥0

Rstep N (L, δ )

The objective f:[0,1] to the real numbers is L-Lipschitz for a known L >0. The bias has the fixed form b(x) = c− for x < τ and 

b(x) = c+ for x ≥ τ , where τ is in (0,1) and | c− |, | c+ | are at most δ.A deterministic algorithm chooses N query points adap-tively, observes y(x)=f(x)+b(x), and repeated queries receive the same value. After N queries the algorithm may output any point of [0,1], and performance is f(x ˆ)-min x∈[0 ,1] f(x) under the quan-tifier order infimum over algorithms followed by supremum over admissible f and b. One-dimensional L-Lipschitz objectives, one fixed two-level bias with a strictly interior jump, deterministic adaptive algorithms using N positive function-value queries, arbitrary output points, and the worst case taken uniformly over every finite bias bound δ. This is the strong-bias, uniform-in-δ

asymptotic and is mathematically distinct from existence of the already established finite-q crossover. For each N and L, SN (L) is the supremum of Rstep N (L, δ)over all finite δ ≥ 0; δ may depend on N inside this supre-mum. The asymptotic is over positive integers N tending to ∞,with L >0 fixed. Every adversarial oracle uses one τ in (0,1), b(x) =

cminus for x < τ and b(x) = cplus for x ≥ τ , and the same 

cminus , c plus throughout its transcript. Let SN (L) = sup δ≥0 Rstep N (L, δ). Determine whether, for every L>0, the limit of N SN (L)/L as N tends to ∞ exists and equals 5/2. 

P062: A sharp joint resolution constant Problem. L=1, σ = 1 , β =r γ, ε =(2r+1) γ, and α = γλ.

ad=d/(d+2). 

Cd = 2 (1 −d)a(−d) 

> d

(1 − ad)(−2) .

Rd,r,λ (γ) = γ(d+2) N ⋆ (d, 1, rγ, 1, (2 r +1) γ, γ λ)/ log(1 /γ λ)

The dimension d is a positive integer, the domain is [0,1] d with the ∞ norm, and f is an unknown real-valued L-Lipschitz function with known L >0. At query xt the oracle returns Yt=f( xt)+b( xt)+ xi t, where b is one fixed unknown function throughout the transcript, 

sup x | b(x) |≤ β, β ≥0 is known, and b has no assumed regularity. For every admissible oracle law, the variables 

xi t are independent and centered and satisfy E[exp( λxi t)] ≤exp( σ2λ2/2) for every real λ, with known σ ≥0; the guarantee is uniform over all laws satisfying this condition. The algorithm is deterministic and adaptive, may repeat query points, uses a budget N in {0,1,2,. . . }, and outputs a point in [0,1] d; when N=0 its output is fixed before observing the oracle. The budget N ⋆ is the smallest nonnegative N for which one algorithm, uniformly over every admissible f, fixed b, and noise law, outputs x ˆ satisfying f(x ˆ)-min x f(x) ≤ ε with probability at least 1-α.The active strip has 0 < α ≤ 1/4, 0 ≤ β < L/4, γ =

ε − 2β > 0, and ε = 2 β + γ < L/2. The regimes ε ≥L/2, 

ε < min{2 β,L/2}, and all equality endpoints are classified separately and are not included in the active-rate claim. Deterministic adaptive value-query algorithms under A1-A6 on [0,1] d with the ∞ norm. The parameters d, r, and 

λ are fixed before γ tends to zero. Only γ small enough that ε < 1/4 and α ≤1/4 is included. The guarantee remains uniform over every fixed bias field and every independent centered 1-sub-Gaussian noise law. Set L=1, σ = 1 , β =r γ, ε =(2r+1) γ, and α = γλ for fixed d in {1,2,. . . }, r ≥0, and λ > 0. Restrict γ to 0 < γ < min{1/[4(2r+1)], 4(−1/λ )}. For every oracle instance, b is one fixed function through-out the transcript and satisfies sup x | b(x) |≤ r γ.Fix a positive integer d, a bias ratio r ≥0, and a confidence-resolution exponent λ>0. On the canonical ray L = σ =1, β =r γ, ε =(2r+1) γ, and α = γλ, determine whether the exact leading constant of the minimax budget is Cd in the limit γ down to zero, where ad=d/(d+2) and Cd =2(1 −d)a(−d) 

> d

(1 − ad)(−2) .

P063: Weak-only convergence in a variable metric Problem. JcM A := ( I + cM A )−1.

xk⇀0 means that ⟨xk, test vector ⟩→ 0 for every 

test vector ∈H. Failure of strong convergence to 0 means 

limsup k→∞ ∥xk∥>0, equivalently there are ε >0 and infinitely many k with ∥xk∥≥ ε.A frozen replay associated with M and c is yj+1 =

JcM A yj with M and c independent of j. H is a separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert space. A:H →H is bounded, self-adjoint, positive semidefi-nite, and maximally monotone, with nonempty infinite-dimensional kernel and nonclosed range. The iterates are exact and satisfy xk+1 = Jck Mk Axk with 0< c min ≤ ck ≤ cmax < ∞.Every Mk is bounded, self-adjoint, and uniformly positive definite, with mI ≼ Mk ≼MI for fixed 0 < m≤M< ∞.There are ηk ≥0 with Pkηk < ∞ such that (1 + 

ηk)−1Mk ≼ Mk+1 for every k. There are no errors, relaxation, inertia, anchoring projec-tions, or iteration-dependent operators. Separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert spaces; bounded self-adjoint positive semidefinite linear A with infinite-dimensional kernel and nonclosed range; exact unre-laxed proximal iterations under uniformly conditioned met-rics and one-sided summable Loewner variation. Closed-range and two-sided-variation recovery questions are ex-cluded from this candidate. The preconditioning convention is JcM A = (I +

cM A )−1; it may not be replaced by J_{ cM −1A}. The positive witness must satisfy the Loewner inequality for every k with one summable sequence ( ηk), not merely on isolated finite blocks. For every fixed metric M occurring in the schedule, every fixed c in [ cmin , c max ], and every y0 in H, the replay yj+1 =

JcM A yj must be shown to converge strongly to a point of ker(A). Determine whether there exists an admissible datum satis-fying A1–A6 and an initial point x0 such that the exact orbit 

xk+1 = JckM,kA xk converges weakly to 0 but not strongly to 0. Any positive witness must verify the global one-sided Loewner condition for the entire infinite schedule and must derive, rather than assume, strong convergence of every as-sociated frozen-metric replay. 

P064: Reciprocal instability of perturbed OMWU Problem. J0=[[0,1,0,1],[-1,0,1,0],[0,-1,0,1],[-1,0,-1,0]], 

(E12) 12 =1 with all other entries zero, and Je=J0-eE12. 

q(t+1) = qt + ηJ e

 2zt − z(t−1) ,zti = tanh( qti /2) , q(−1) = q0,η = 120 √2 .Bad e(q0) holds when the corresponding orbit satisfies limsup as t tends to ∞ of ∥xt − (1 /2, 1/2) 4∥2 >0. 

β(e)=inf{ ∥q0 ∥_∞: q0 is finite and Bad e(q0) holds}, with the infimum of the empty set equal to + ∞.The interaction graph is finite, connected, and undirected; every player has two pure actions, total payoff is the sum of incident-edge payoffs, and every entry of every perturbed edge-payoff matrix has absolute value at most one. Write zi = xi, 1 − xi, 2 and let gi(z) be player i’s payoff difference between actions 1 and 2. Euclidean norm is used on z-space and its induced spectral norm on matrices. The zero-sum baseline has g0(z) = J0z with J0 skew-symmetric, smallest singular value at least a fixed σ greater than zero, and a unique fully mixed Nash equilibrium. For the perturbed payoff-difference Jacobian J, the defect is δ=∥J-J0∥2. With cost pseudogradient F=-g, the symmetric part of DF has a negative eigenvalue of magnitude at most δ.Moreover, no positive weights wi satisfy wiJij = −wj Jji on every interaction edge, so the perturbation cannot be removed by positive player-wise payoff rescaling. The perturbed game has a unique Nash equilibrium x⋆ , it is fully mixed, and every action probability at x⋆ is at least a fixed κ greater than zero. Players maximize payoff and use xt+1  

> i,a

=

xti,a exp( η(2ui,a (xt

> −i

) − ui,a (xt−1 

> −i

))) / P 

> b

xti,b 

exp( η(2ui,b (xt

> −i

) − ui,b (xt−1 

> −i

))). The history is initial-ized by x−1 = x0 with x0 strictly interior, and 0 < η 

L≤1/10, where L= ∥J∥2.The frontier quantifies how far an initialization must retreat toward the simplex boundary before the explicit one-edge im-balance can defeat last-iterate convergence. It neither repeats the established positive radius for a different fixed orientation nor asks again whether a bad vanishing-defect orientation ex-ists. Fix J0=[[0,1,0,1],[-1,0,1,0],[0,-1,0,1],[-1,0,-1,0]] and 

Je=J0-eE12 for 0 < e<1/4, where (E12) 12 =1 and all other entries vanish. Set η=1/(20 √(2)) and use q(t+1) = qt+η J e(2 zt −

z(t−1) ), z ti =tanh( qti /2), and q(−1) = q0.An orbit is bad when limsup as t tends to ∞ of ∥xt −

(1 /2, 1/2) 4∥2 is positive. The target is a lower bound on the initialization scale of bad orbits; it does not assert an upper bound or a complete basin classification. For 0<e<1/4, let Je=J0-eE12, where E12 has its sole nonzero entry equal to one in row 1, column 2. Let β(e)

be the infimum of ∥q0 ∥_∞ over finite initial log-odds vec-tors whose initialized OMWU orbit is bad, with β(e) = + ∞

if no bad orbit exists. Prove or refute that liminf as e decreases to zero of e β(e) is positive. 

P065: Heavy-tail objective rates for clipped proximal SAGA Problem. Φ( x) = n(−1) P 

> i

fi(x)+r(x), and x⋆ is its unique minimizer. Initialize hi, 0=0; form ¯ht, sample It from pt, query Zt,set Yt = ¯ht + [ Zt − hIt,t ]/[n pIt,t ], v t = clip τt (Yt), x t+1 =

prox ηtr (xt − ηtvt), and refresh only hIt,t with clip τt (Zt). 

ηt = 2

μ(t + t0) , t0 ≥ 8Lmax 

μ ,τt = C(q, n, p min , μ, L max , (σi)) 

· (t + t0)1/q .

¯xT = 2[ T (T + 1)] (−1) 

> T

X

> t=1

tx t

RC (q, instance) = sup 

> p

sup  

> T≥1

T 2( q−1) /q 

· EΦ(¯ xT ) − Φ( x⋆).

With Ht = n(−1) P 

> i

∥hi,t − ∇ fi(xt)∥q , define 

Qt = 2(q−1) (∥∇ F( xt)∥q + 2 (2 q−1) (np min )(1 −q)(Ht +

n(−1) P 

> i

σqi )). The objective is Φ( x) = n−1 Pni=1 fi(x)+r(x) on a finite-dimensional Euclidean space, and x0 belongs to dom(r). Each fi is convex with Li-Lipschitz gradient, their average is μ-strongly convex for μ > 0, and r is proper, closed, convex, and has an exactly evaluable proximal map. A query to component i at x returns Gi(x) = ∇fi(x)+ xi i.For one fixed q in (1,2), E[ xi i given the pre-query history and It=i]=0 and E[ ∥xi i∥q given that information] ≤ σqi ; no second moment is assumed. Before query t, pt is measurable with respect to the pre-query history, 0 < p min ≤1/n, pi,t ≥ pmin for every i, and 

It has conditional distribution pt. The target is uniform over all such predictable rules, including pi,t =1/n. Fresh oracle noise obeys A3 conditional on the past and selected component at every queried point. The algorithm is exactly the recursion in central object .Importance weighting occurs before clipping, clipping oc-curs only in the displayed estimator and table updates, and the same noisy query Zt is shared by both uses. The stepsizes are ηt=min{1/( 4Lmax ), 2/[μ(t+ t0)]} with 

t0 ≥ 8Lmax /μ . An admissible threshold rule C maps only (q,n, pmin , μ, L max , (σi)ni=1 ) to a finite cτ in (0, ∞), before any oracle draws, and τt = cτ (t + t0)1/q . The same selected 

cτ is used when comparing adaptive and uniform sampling. Complexity counts every noisy component query. Use exactly the A1-A7 objective, oracle, recursion, sched-ules, and predictable sampling class. This frontier concerns the weighted composite objective gap, not the already estab-lished pointwise squared-distance and table-energy stability capability. For T ≥1, use ¯xT =2[T(T+1)] (−1) PTt=1 t xt and no alter-native averaging scheme. The threshold rule may depend only on (q,n, pmin , μ, L max , (σi)) and must return a finite cτ >0independently of t0, the objective offsets, and the sampling history. The positive claim is uniform over every A4-predictable probability process, including uniform sampling. Uniform failure may use a different predictable rule and horizon for each requested bound M, but must use one fixed admissible instance for each threshold rule C. Determine whether the exact A1-A7 recursion admits a strictly positive parameter-only threshold rule whose lin-early weighted average achieves the heavy-tail expected composite-objective rate uniformly over all admissible pre-dictable sampling rules, or whether recurrent clipping and recycled-table bias create the exact quantifier-level obstruc-tion. 

P066: Sharpness of the realized chord bound Problem. 

Dϕk (x, y ) = ϕk(x) − ϕk(y)− < ∇ϕk(y), x − y > Pk(y) = arg min 

> x∈N

{f (x) + Dϕk (x, y )},ek(y) = f (Pk(y)) + Dϕk (Pk(y), y ),Gk(y) = ∇ek(y),Vk(y) = ∇ϕk(y) − ∇ ϕk(Pk(y)) .

For (k,y) in Rc, put x = Pk(y), d=y-x, q=d/ ∥d∥, and 

Ac,k,y (t) = nabla 2ϕk(x + td )q. Define 

Kc = sup 

> (k,y )∈Rc
> t∈[0 ,1]

max 

 ∥Ac,k,y (t)∥∥Ac,k,y (1) ∥ ,

∥Ac,k,y (1) ∥∥Ac,k,y (t)∥



,and 

βc = inf 

> (k,y )∈Rc
> t∈[0 ,1]

⟨q, A c,k,y (t)⟩∥Ac,k,y (t)∥ .

For an empty Rc, set Kc = βc = 1 .

ρc(k, y )=∥Vk(y)∥/∥Gk(y)∥=∥∈ 

t10Ac,k,y (t)dt ∥/∥Ac,k,y (1) ∥ for every (k,y) in Rc.A pair s=(( kj ), (yj )) belongs to S(c) exactly when the kj

are pairwise distinct, yj tends to 0, Pkj (yj ) tends to 0, and there exists j0 such that ( kj , y j ) belongs to Rc for every j ≥j0. 

Ecell = inf {liminf j→∞ ρc(kj , y j ) : cinC cell and 

s=(( kj ), (yj )) in S(c)}. The function f is proper and lower semicontinuous and is relatively prox-regular at a stationary pair ( ¯x,0) with respect to a fixed reference Legendre kernel on a neighborhood of ¯x.There are convex neighborhoods V contained in the inte-rior of N, with compact closure of N contained in a common open domain U, and a fixed λ > 0 used for every kernel. Each ϕk is a C2 very strictly convex Legendre function on U; the kernels share their domain but may repeat, reverse, recover, or have unbounded ambient condition numbers as k varies. For every k and y in V, the minimization of f(x)+ λ−1Dϕ,k (x, y ) over x in N has a unique minimizer 

Pk(y) in the interior of N, and the resulting localized enve-lope ek is C1 on V. All gradients, Hessians, and residual norms are measured in one fixed finite-dimensional coordinate system; affine changes to ϕk are identified because they do not change its Bregman divergence. A fixed finite-dimensional sharpness cell inside the tar-get anchor. Each admissible sequence uses one normalized quadratic anchored instance and one fixed witnessing pair (r,L), although different ε-level near-extremizers may use different tuples. Only actual localized proximal chords are used. The question is whether Hessian integrability, normal-ization at the stationary point, and simultaneous control of all realized chords in the tuple’s fixed local window force a uniform strict improvement over 1/4. For each cell tuple c=(I,r,L), all active constants and ad-missible sequences use the particular bundle Rc consisting of pairs (k,y) with x = Pk(y), ∥x∥≤ r, ∥y∥≤ r, 0 <∥y-x ∥, and 

∥Vk(y)∥≤ L. The sharpness cell is Kc ≤2 and βc ≥1/2, where Kc con-trols radial action distortion and βc controls the longitudinal fraction < q,A(t) >/∥A(t) ∥ on Rc.Every instance component I must use n=3, ¯x = 0 , λ =1, f(x)= ∥x∥2/2, U = R3, and nabla 2ϕk(0) =I for every k. For each ε-level witness, the entire shrinking sequence must lie in one tuple cε = ( Iε, r ε, L ε), so its objective, di-mension, localization, radius, and subgradient window do not change with the sequence index. Different positive ε values may use different tuples. Restrict to normalized three-dimensional quadratic in-stances inside A1-A5: ¯x = 0 , λ =1, f(x)= ∥x∥2/2, U = R3,and nabla 2ϕk(0) =I for every k. Bind each cell as a tu-ple c=(I,r,L), where I is one fixed anchored instance and r,L are fixed witnesses for the realized-bundle bounds 

Kc ≤2 and βc ≥1/2. The elementary projection bound gives 

ρk(y)=∥Vk(y)∥/∥Gk(y)∥≥ 1/4 on Rc. Determine whether 1/4 is the class infimum over tuple-bound admissible shrink-ing sequences: for every ε>0, may one choose a single tuple 

cε and a sequence eventually contained in its fixed Rc,ε whose liminf calibration ratio is at most 1/4+ ε?

P067: Tail-adaptive finite-sum optimization Problem. 

Φ( x) = 1

n

X

> i

fi(x) + g(x),

Φ⋆ = min  

> x

Φ( x), ∆0 = Φ( x0) − Φ⋆,

and κ = L/μ .For p in P, s(p) is the common value σ1(p)=. . . = σn(p).

Bbal (I, T, p, C 0) = C0 exp 



− TC0(n + κ)



∆0

+ C0

μ s(p)2 log 2(2 + T )

T 2( p−1) /p .

In Euclidean space, Φ( x) = n(−1) P 

> i

fi(x)+g(x); every 

fi is convex with L-Lipschitz gradient, the smooth average is 

μ-strongly convex with μ > 0, g is proper closed convex with an exact Euclidean proximal map, and Φ has a minimizer x⋆ .A query of component i at any history-measurable point x returns a fresh vector Gi(x) with conditional mean ∇fi(x).For p in (1,2], σi(p) is the smallest uniform conditional Lp radius over all query points and all finite admissible prior query histories, independent of any candidate algorithm. Let P be the nonempty set of p for which every σi(p) is finite, and permit σi(p)=0. Oracle innovations are conditionally independent across calls given their query histories. An admissible rule chooses before each call a strictly pos-itive predictable distribution on the n components, samples one component, may retain finite state, and may apply ex-act proximal operations. It may use n, L, and μ but is not given p, P, any σi(p), the final horizon, or a scale-dependent probability floor. Every fresh component response is charged, including re-sponses used for allocation statistics or stored state. For each T≥ 1, bxT is measurable with respect to the first T charged responses and the rule’s internal randomness. The initial point x0 has finite Delta 0 = Φ( x0) − P hi ∗.Expectations are over oracle, component-sampling, and in-ternal randomness. One-dimensional composite finite-sum instances satisfy-ing exactly A1-A5, with arbitrary finite n ≥2 and equal canon-ical component radii at every supported moment order. Com-ponents may have different objectives and oracle laws. The rule may use n, L, μ, and exact proximal operations but is not given p, P, the common scales, or T. The displayed bound is the sole target. For every p in P there is a finite s(p) ≥0 such that σi(p)=s(p) for every component i. The number of components satisfies n ≥2, and no equality or common-minimizer condition is imposed on the compo-nent objectives. The same rule R and constant C0 must work for all scoped instances, supported orders, and charged horizons without a scale-dependent probability floor. The stochastic comparator remains the raw-seed expression; under scale balance it equals s(p)2log 2(2+T)/( μT 2( p−1) /p ). Decide whether there exist one centralized anytime state-ful proximal finite-sum rule R and one universal numer-ical constant C0 ≥ 1 such that, for every scoped one-dimensional instance satisfying A1-A5 with n ≥ 2 and 

σ1(p) = ... = σn(p) for every p in P, every integer T ≥ 1, and every p in P, its output bxT satisfies E[ Φ( bxT ) − P hi ∗] ≤ C0 exp(-T/(C0(n+ κ))) Delta 0 + (C0/ μ)(( P 

> i

σi(p))/n) 2log 2(2+ 

T )/T 2( p−1) /p .

P068: Exact cross-kernel comparison constants Problem. P fϕ (y) is the unique interior localized branch from A4 and 

gfϕ (y) = λ−1ϕ′ ′ (y)( y − P fϕ (y)) 

For h = ϕ-ψ, χUW (h)=sup{ | h’(x)-h’(z) |: x in U, z in W} and ηUW (h)=sup{ | h’ ’(x)(x-z) |: x in U, z in W}. 

CP is the supremum of | P fϕ (y) − P fpsi (y) | /χ UW (ϕ-

ψ), Cg is the supremum of | gfϕ (y) − gfpsi (y) | /[χUW (ϕ-

ψ)+ ηUW (ϕ-ψ)], and Cχg uses χUW (ϕ-ψ) alone; every supre-mum ranges over ordered ϕ,ψ in K, f in F, and y in U’. For ρ in K define Aρ(u, v ) = [ρ’(u)-ρ’(v)]/(u-v) when u̸=v and Aρ(v, v ) = ρ’ ’(v). Set a⋆(u, v ) =min ρ∈K Aρ(u, v ).For an ordered pair ϕ,ψ, let h = ϕ-ψ, d=u-v, c=h’(y)-h’(v), and Bϕ(u, v ) = Aϕ(u, v ) − λ r a ⋆(u, v ). The objective-free feasible set R consists of tuples ( ϕ,ψ,y,u,v) in K x K x U’ x W x W satisfying c d ≥ Bϕ(u, v )d2.

RP is the supremum over R of | u-v | /χ UW (h).Rg

is the supremum over R of | −ϕ’‘(y)(u-v)+h”(y)(y-v) |

/[λ(χUW (h)+ ηUW (h))], with the fixed quotient convention. Fix finite r and R, constants 0 < a0 ≤a1 and 0 < b0 ≤b1, and the geometric data in A2-A4. The class F is defined extensionally as all proper lower-semicontinuous objectives equipped with a reference limiting-subgradient pair that sat-isfy A3-A4; the minimax suprema range over this entire class. The admissible kernels form a fixed nonempty family, chosen before F, of C2 Legendre functions on a common open neighborhood V. Modulo affine functions, the family is compact in the local C2 topology of uniform gradient and Hessian convergence on compact subsets of V, satisfies m I≤Hess ϕ ≤M I, and has a uniform local Lipschitz bound on its Hessians. Every f in F is relatively prox-regular at its reference pair with respect to every admissible kernel on common pri-mal, dual, and function-value-attentive neighborhoods, with modulus at most r. The proximal parameter λ is fixed and 

κ = 1 − λ r>0; no asymptotic claim as κ tends to zero is authorized. There are center neighborhoods U’ and U with closure(U’) contained in U and closure(U) contained in V, and a fixed compact W contained in V, such that for every authorized f, y in U, and kernel ϕ there is a unique interior localized proximal selection P fϕ (y) in W satisfying the unconstrained optimality inclusion. Every corresponding primal-dual graph pair lies in all common neighborhoods required by A3, and sup ∥y-P fϕ (y)∥ over the authorized indices is at most R. No global-minimizer assertion is included. Kernel perturbations are identified modulo affine func-tions. For h = ϕ-ψ define 

χUW (h) = sup  

> (y,u )∈U×W

∥∇ h(y) − ∇ h(u)∥,ηUW (h) = sup  

> (y,u )∈U×W

∥∇ 2h(y)( y − u)∥.

These discrepancies are fixed independently of f and its prox-imal branch. The fixed geometry is nonvacuously compatible with the probe family: F contains every kernel-independent affine-quadratic probe fa,b (x) =< a,x >+(b/2) ∥x∥2 with a0 ≤∥ a∥≤ a1 and b in {0} union [b0,b1]. For every such probe, center, and admissible kernel, its actual localized branch lies in one fixed compact W0 contained in the interior of W and its graph pair lies in the common neighborhoods from A3. Singleton indicators may be used as boundary tests when they satisfy A3-A4, but they are not the only admissible ob-jectives. One-dimensional fixed-margin classification for one ex-plicit compact two-parameter kernel family, fixed nested center intervals, one compact localization interval, and the full extensional objective class authorized by A1-A6. The problem concerns exactly two finite sharp constants and one chord-only divergence statement; it makes no pointwise-necessity, weakest-topology, or vanishing-margin claim. Set λ=1/2, r=1/2, κ=3/4, V=(-2,2), U=(-1/4,1/4), U’=(-1/8,1/8), W=[-1,1], W0=[-3/4,3/4], R=1, a0=1/4, a1=1/2, b0=1/4, and b1=1/2. The admissible family is K={ ϕq,e : q in [1,3/2], e in [0,1/4]}, where ϕq, 0(x)=q x2/2 and ϕq,e (x)=q x2/2 +(e3/8)sin(x/e) for e >0. The objective class remains the entire extensional class F specified by A1; it is not replaced by the affine-quadratic probes or by a hand-picked witness subclass. All normalized quotients use the A5 convention: 0/0 is zero and a positive numerator over a zero denominator is positive ∞.Specialize A1-A6 to the one-dimensional compact kernel family ϕq,e (x)=q x2/2 +( e3/8)sin(x/e), with the perturbation defined as zero at e=0, q in [1,3/2], and e in [0,1/4]. Deter-mine whether the exact proximal and combined ordinary-gradient minimax constants equal the objective-free two-point relaxations RP and Rg forced by simultaneous rela-tive hypomonotonicity. The same specialization must retain the contrasting classification Cχg = + ∞ for the chord-only ordinary-gradient denominator. 

P069: The small-observation-noise horizon Problem. For a reached history hk under the past receding-horizon law, define Bk(hk)=x0 plus the integral from 0 to tk of the realized past control. The two mode-conditioned current states associated with that same history are xσk (hk)= Bk(hk)+ σ a tk.Let pi σk (hk) be the fixed regular conditional probability of 

Θ=σ a given Fk=hk, so pi − 

> k

plus pi + 

> k

equals one. For an admissible H-window observation-feedback con-tinuation η, let P σ,η k,h k be the law of its unique strong contin-uation on [ tk,tk+H], initialized at xσk (hk), under Θ=σ a and the observation equation with noise intensity ν.Define Gk(hk,η) as the sum over σ in {-1,+1} of pi σk (hk)times P σ,η k,h k (Xs belongs to K for every s in [ tk,tk+H]). Define Ck(hk)={ η: η is an admissible H-window con-tinuation and Gk(hk,η)≥1-ε}. Feasibility means Ck(hk) is nonempty; no supremum over η is assumed to be attained. An admissible receding-horizon law measurably selects 

ηk(hk) in Ck(hk) whenever Ck(hk) is nonempty, applies ηk

on [ tk,tk+1 ), and reoptimizes at tk+1 ; after the first empty 

Ck it uses the fixed fallback from A5. For a receding-horizon law, τK is the first time X leaves K and τF =inf{ tk:Ck(hk) is empty}, with the conventions in A4-A5. For ν > 0, let Rν be the set of T ≥0 for which there exists an admissible receding-horizon law satisfying P(min( τK ,τF )>

T) ≥1-α. Define Tν =supremum( Rν union {0}); apply the zero convention of A5 when no law can start. For σ in {-1,+1}, define τσ =(1-σ x0)/(a-U). This is the latest state-exit time attainable when σ is known initially, achieved by constant control -σ U. Define ell σ =∆ times (floor(( τσ -H)/ ∆)+1). Under grid nonresonance, ell σ is the first sampling time tk at which 

tk+H > τ σ .Define TF I as the supremum of T ≥0 such that p0 times 1{ell_ →T} plus (1-p0) times 1{ ell + > T} is at least 1-α.For one common observation-feedback functional evalu-ated on the same observation path, the mode-conditioned observation-drift difference is 2at. Its deterministic likelihood-information clock is Iν (t)= 4a2t3/( 3nu 2), inde-pendently of the common controlled midpoint. The hidden drift Θ takes values -a and a, where a >0, with prior probabilities p0 and 1-p0 for some p0 in (0,1). For a fixed known x0 in (-1,1), the state satisfies 

dX t=( Θ+ut)dt and | ut |≤ U for a fixed U >0; x0 is an argument of the maximal-horizon value. The observation satisfies dY t=Xt dt+ νdV t. Admissible controls are bounded nonanticipative Borel functionals of the observed path for which the coupled state-observation equations have a unique strong closed-loop solution under each drift mode. The regimes ν > 0 and ν=0 are treated as distinct information structures. The hard hidden-state constraint is K=[-1,1], and 

τK =inf{t ≥0: Xt is not in K}, with inf of the empty set equal to ∞.Fix H > ∆>0, ε in (0,1/2), and α in (0,1). At tk, Ck consists of admissible future observation-feedback controls satisfying the conditional mixture path-safety constraint on [ tk,tk+H]. A receding-horizon law is a measurable history-dependent selection from Ck whenever it is nonempty, applies the se-lected control for ∆ time, and then reoptimizes; after Ck first becomes empty it follows a prescribed admissible fallback so that the closed loop and both stopping times remain defined. Set τF =inf{ tk:Ck is empty}, and set T ⋆=0 when C0 is empty or no admissible selection starts at time zero. Assumptions A1-A5 with fixed a >0, 0 < U< a, x0 in (-1,1), p0 in (0,1), H > ∆>0, ε in (0,1/2), and α in (0,1). For each ν > 0, conditional probabilities are fixed regular conditional versions on canonical observation-path space. The safety event includes both endpoints of each prediction window. Every Tν uses the same admissibility, measurable-selection, fallback, and strict stopping-time conventions. TF I 

is a counterfactual benchmark with the mode known initially; it does not identify the distinct ν=0 information structure with a positive-noise model. Require 0 < U< a. For every σ in {-1,+1}, τσ =(1-σ x0)/(a-U) is strictly greater than H. For every σ in {-1,+1}, ( τσ -H)/ ∆ is not an integer. 

A differs from p0 and from 1-p0. Use fixed regular conditional posterior and continua-tion laws on canonical observation-path space, evaluated on reached sampled histories outside one common null set. Fix all parameters except the positive observation-noise intensity ν in the binary-drift model, assume 0<U<a, and define the sampled feasible sets Ck by the explicit condi-tional mixture path-safety predicate below. Let Tν be the resulting maximal reliable horizon and let TF I be the full-information grid benchmark determined by the two mode-wise first prediction-infeasibility times. Prove or refute that 

Tν converges to TF I as ν decreases to zero. 

P070: Weak frustration and optimistic recurrence Problem. For ε > 0 and z in [-1,1] 3, set dε(z)= Jε z, where 

Jε=[[0,1,-(1+ ε)],[-1,0,1],[1,-1,0]]. Set ηt=1/(64 √(t+1)), ztm=tanh( qtm/2) coordinatewise, and 

q(t+1)  

> m

=qtm+ηt(2dε,m (ztm)-dε,m (z(t−1)  

> m

)). 

Nε consists of z in [-1,1] 3 such that di=0 when | zi |<1, 

di ≥0 when zi=1, and di ≤0 when zi=-1. For every ε > 0 in scope, these conditions imply Nε={0}. Acc( zm) is the set of limits of subsequences z(tk ) 

> m

with tk

tending to ∞.Writing dti=(Jε,m ztm)i, define Di,+(T)=sum from t=0 to T-1 of (1 − zti )dti/2 and Di,-(T)=sum from t=0 to T-1 of -(1 + zti )dti/2. Set Ri(T)=max(0, Di,+(T), Di,-(T)). There are three players on the triangle graph, each with two pure actions represented by a centered mixed coordinate 

zi in (-1,1). Player i’s payoff is the sum of its incident bilinear edge payoffs, with centered payoff-difference operator Jε=[[0,1,-(1+ ε)],[-1,0,1],[1,-1,0]], under a common normalization keeping all pure payoffs bounded. The admissible parameter range is 0 ≤ ε ≤1/100. The pri-mary target quantifies existentially over a positive sequence 

εm decreasing to zero; ε=0 is used only as a balanced com-parison cell. All players use the displayed deterministic full-information optimistic multiplicative-weights log-odds re-currence with the fixed schedule ηt=1/(64 √(t+1)) for every integer t ≥0. For each tested positive ε, the two initial log-odds vectors 

q(−1) and q0 are finite and may depend on ε, so both ini-tial strategy profiles are strictly interior; no single history is required to work for all ε.External regret compares each player’s realized expected payoff with that of each fixed pure action against the same sequence of opponents’ mixed profiles, and vanishing regret means the positive part of the larger of these two cumulative payoff differences is o(T). For 0< ε ≤1/100, use exactly Jε=[[0,1,-(1+ ε)],[-1,0,1],[1,-1,0]], ηt=1/(64 √(t+1)), zti =tanh( qti /2), and 

q(t+1)  

> i

=qti +ηt(2 (Jεzt)i-( Jεz(t−1) )i). Histories q(−1) ,q0 are finite and may depend on ε. The balanced endpoint and deleted-edge path are diagnostic cells only. The primary target requires a strictly positive sequence εm

decreasing to zero, with 0 < ε m ≤1/100. Each εm may have its own finite pair q(−1)  

> m

,q0 

> m

in R3.For every positive ε in scope, distance is measured from the complete Nash set, which equals the singleton {0} in centered coordinates. Two accumulation points must be witnessed by two sepa-rated infinite subsequences of exact iterates. Unweighted regret must be calculated against both pure actions for the exact trajectory. Determine whether arbitrarily small positive frustration in the specified three-player binary-action triangle admits parameter-dependent finite interior histories whose exact diminishing-step optimistic trajectories remain recurrent away from Nash equilibrium while every player has van-ishing unweighted external regret. 

P071: Attainment of the viable drift energy Problem. For the solution driven by v and started at x0, τv

is the infimum of times t ≥0 for which Xt is not in (0,1). J(T,x0;v) is the expectation of the integral of v (Xt)2 from 0 to T wedge τv when the probability of τv > T is one, and is ∞ otherwise. 

AT (x0) is the set of v in V for which J(T,x0;v) is finite. M⋆(T, x 0) is the infimum of J(T,x0;v) over v in AT (x0) ,with value ∞ only when AT (x0) is empty. The state space before exit is (0,1), T is fixed with 0 <

T< ∞, and x0 lies in (0,1). The state satisfies dX t=v( Xt)dt+ dW t with a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion and constant diffusion coeffi-cient one. The ambient class V consists of stationary Markov drifts v:(0,1) → R that are Borel measurable and locally Lips-chitz on (0,1); endpoint divergence is allowed, and endpoint asymptotics do not determine the drift in the interior. For every v in V, the stochastic differential equation started at x0 has a unique law up to τ =inf{t ≥ 0 : Xt is not in (0,1)}. Define J(T,x0;v)=E[integral from 0 to T wedge τ of v(Xt)2 dt] when P( τ > T)=1, and J(T, x 0; v) = ∞

otherwise. Define AT (x0) ={v in V:J(T,x0;v) < ∞} and M⋆(T, x 0) =inf{J(T,x0;v):v in AT (x0) }, with the convention that the infimum is ∞ if AT (x0) is empty. No reflecting local time, impulse, projection, absorption convention, boundary reset, or volatility control may enforce survival. Critical logarithmic profiles may be tested near zero in the form v(x)=1/(2x)+ c0/(x log(1/x)) plus an explicitly con-trolled lower-order remainder, with the reflected inward form near one. These profiles are diagnostic subclasses and are not restrictions on AT (x0) .Convergence of feedbacks is compact-open convergence: 

vn converges to v locally uniformly on every compact subset of (0,1). Any candidate limit must be rechecked for well-posedness, survival through T, and finite energy; shared end-point profiles do not imply compact-open precompactness. One-dimensional unit diffusion on (0,1), with arbitrary fixed finite T >0 and x0 in (0,1), stationary locally Lipschitz drift-only feedback, almost-sure survival through T, extended quadratic energy, and compact-open convergence used only to classify defects. No boundary actuator, time-dependent feedback, endpoint-envelope restriction, or relaxation of the feedback class is allowed. The assertion is pointwise in the displayed pair (T,x0), and the positive target quantifies over every T >0 and x0 in (0,1); parameter dependence may not be suppressed. The optimization is over the entire class V authorized by the anchor, not an endpoint-profile subclass, a uniformly Lipschitz subclass, or a prescribed singularity envelope. Nonattainment requires both a sequence vn in AT (x0) 

with J(T,x0; vn) converging to M ⋆(T, x 0) and a proof that every v in AT (x0) has strictly larger cost. Any proposed minimizing sequence must be audited sep-arately for interior concentration or oscillation, loss of end-point viability, and failure of energy lower semicontinuity. Determine whether, for every fixed T ∈ (0 , ∞) and x0 ∈

(0 , 1) , the finite infimum M⋆(T, x 0) over stationary locally Lipschitz drifts that keep dX t = v(Xt) dt + dW t inside 

(0 , 1) through time T is attained. 

P072: The sharp one-update contraction coefficient Problem. η0 = 1 /(μt 0). 

Vq (p) = n(−q) Pni=1 σqi p(1 −q) 

> i

.

Pq (β) holds if there exists finite Kq such that every authorized one-update datum satisfies E[ ∥X1 − x⋆ ∥q ] ≤

(1 − β/t 0)∥X0 − x⋆ ∥q + Kq μ(−q)Vq (p0)/t q

> 0

.

β∗ 

> q

= sup {βin [0 , q ] : Pq (β)holds }

λq =2q[1-(1+1/(2q)) (−q)]. 

F (x) = n(−1) P 

> i

fi(x)+r(x) on a finite-dimensional Eu-clidean space, where n ≥2, each fi is convex with Li-Lipschitz gradient, r is proper, closed, convex, and prox-imable, and F is μ-strongly convex. Its unique minimizer x⋆ 

satisfies ∇fi(x⋆ )=0 for every i and 0 belongs to partial r( x⋆ ). A fresh query to component i at x returns Gs,i (x) = 

∇fi(x) + xi s,i . Conditional on the pre-query history, xi s,i is fresh, centered, independent of earlier oracle noise, indepen-dent of x, and satisfies E[ ∥xi s,i ∥q ] = σqi for fixed unknown σi in (0, ∞) and q in (1,2). No second moment, clipping, free batch, or uncharged oracle call is available. Charged rounds are indexed by s=0,1,. . . ,B-1. Before any oracle call, the complete indicator schedule ( as) is fixed, or sampled using external randomness independent of every or-acle output and then fixed. If as=0, the round makes one cal-ibration query at a declared reference point and sets Xs+1 =

Xs. If as=1, it draws Is from positive predictable probabili-ties ps, queries Gs,I s (Xs), forms vs = Gs,I s (Xs)/(n ps,I s ), and sets Xs+1 = prox ηsr (Xs − ηsvs). Query components and update probabilities may depend on the observable past, but as and all future indicators may not depend on any opti-mization or calibration oracle output. Every call advances s, and the output is XB .Fix ε in (0, 2(q−1) -1). Before observing oracle noise, the policy chooses t0 ≥max{2q, 8Lmax /(με )}, where Lmax =max i Li, and uses ηs = 1 /(μ(s+ t0)) on update rounds. At every update round, ps,i ≥ 4Li/(n μ(s+ t0)) for all i. Thus cal-ibration advances the floor-release and stepsize clocks, and 

t0 remains visible in the deterministic transient. Constants in the target inequality may depend only on q and the displayed numerical floor coefficient, not on n, B, μ, the Li, t 0, ε , or the unknown scales. The frontier concerns exactly one externally scheduled update with B=1 and a0=1. It ranges over every finite-dimensional A1-A2 datum, deterministic X0, admissible ε

and t0, and pre-query probability vector satisfying A5. It ex-cludes A3 and makes no charged-horizon composition claim. Set B=1 and a0=1, with X0 and p0 fixed before the fresh component and oracle noise are drawn. The finite remainder constant Kq may depend only on q and the fixed numerical floor coefficient in A5. The sharp coefficient is the supremum of all β in [0,q] for which the displayed inequality holds uniformly over the complete one-update class. The bounded common-shape premise A3 is not used. For q in (1,2), let λq =2q[1-(1+1/(2q)) (−q)]. Classify the largest coefficient β for which a uniform one-update bound E[ ∥X1 − x⋆ ∥q ] ≤ (1 − β/t 0)∥X0 − x⋆ ∥q +

Kq μ(−q)Vq (p0)/t q 

> 0

holds over every B=1, a0=1 instance au-thorized by A1, A2, A4, and A5, with finite Kq depending only on q and the fixed floor coefficient. Determine whether this sharp coefficient equals λq .

P073: The 3/5 transition for an exact rank-two kernel Problem. For an entry set E, PE (D) agrees with D on E and is zero outside E. Kern( Ω) is the event that there exist distinct M, M′

in Kn and S,T separately in L1/32 (Ω ) such that 

PΩminus (SunionT )(M-M′)=0. n is even and sufficiently large. The admissible signal class 

Kn consists of real n by n matrices with exact rank two, Frobenius norm one, condition number at most two, and every row-space and column-space leverage score at most 4/n. 

R and C are deterministic subsets of [n] of size n/2, fixed before sampling. Entries are sampled independently with probability q on R x C and probability p elsewhere, where 0< q≤p≤1. The modulus is simultaneous over Kn after Ω

is realized, so a competing pair may depend on Ω. High probability means probability at least 1-n(−10) .The corruption fraction is fixed at ρ=1/32. The feasible propensity region requires every expected row and column degree to be at least 64 log n, where log is natural; this degree condition is only a baseline and not the sought rare-rectangle criterion. Corruption values are arbitrary and their support may de-pend on M, Ω, and the realized noise, but its row and column counts are capped by floor( ρd i(Ω )) and floor( ρe j (Ω )), re-spectively. When two explanations are compared, their deletion or corruption supports S and T must each satisfy the A5 caps separately; they may not be replaced by one support obeying doubled caps. Only the noiseless p=1 two-level design, exact finite end-point pairs in Kn, corruption fraction 1/32, and attained zero-residual secants are considered. Positive lower bounds for the global modulus, tangent-modulus bounds, noisy risk, and general propensity matrices are excluded. Unlike the established full-observation results and the earlier tangent frontier, this asks whether finite global ambiguity persists under nonuniform sampling. Fix p=1 and allow q in (0,1], with deterministic half-size sets rset and cset fixed before sampling. Every kernel witness must use distinct finite matrices M and M′ in Kn; a limiting tangent direction or vanishing residual sequence is insufficient. The two supports S and T are subsets of the realized sam-ple and must separately satisfy every floor-valued row and column cap at fraction 1/32. The endpoint pair and both supports may depend on the realized sample Ω.Set p=1. Determine whether q=3/5 is the sharp high-probability transition, outside a fixed constant window, be-tween existence and nonexistence of an attained exact kernel over the full anchored rank-two class. 

P074: The selected-limit envelope for gradient descent Problem. Z(f)={x ∈Rn:f(x)=0}. 

xk+1 = xk-η∇f( xk), where η=t/L. q( χ,t)=1-t(2-t)/ χ.For an admissible instance with 0 < e<1, set T = ∞ if its trajectory does not converge to some x ∞ ∈ Z(f); otherwise set T = sup k∈K(q) ∥xk-x ∞∥ /(r √(e) qk/ 2). Set T=0 when e=0. For q=0, convergence additionally means x 1=x ∞.C⋆(χ,t) is the supremum of T over all safe admissible instances having the fixed certified parameters χ and t. The dimension n is arbitrary and f: Rn→ [0 , ∞) is contin-uously differentiable with nonempty zero set. The gradient is globally L-Lipschitz for a certified L >0, and on B(x 0,r) it satisfies ∥∇ f(x) ∥2 ≥ 2μf(x) for a certified 

μ ∈(0,L]. The radius r >0 and initial point x 0 are fixed, with normal-ized energy e=2f(x 0)/( μr2) and condition ratio χ=L/ μ.The iterates are exact gradient descent xk+1 =

xk−η∇f( xk) with normalized step t= ηL∈(0,1]. The frontier is classwise: Θ(χ,t) is defined using all dimen-sions and all functions satisfying A1–A4 with the stated cer-tified constants, and closed-ball invariance is distinguished from strict interior invariance. All dimensions and all objectives authorized by A1–A5, with L and μ treated as certified constants. The supremum defining C ⋆ ranges over 0 ≤e<1 and every finite iterate. Fail-ure to converge to a zero is assigned infinite cost. When q( χ,t)=0, only k=0 enters the normalized ratio and finite ter-mination is checked separately. L and μ are the certified constants from A2, whether or not they are optimal for the objective. Only instances with normalized initial energy 0 ≤e<1 en-ter C ⋆.An instance with e=0 has normalized tail cost zero. If q=0, the ratio is evaluated only at k=0 and the target additionally requires x 1=x ∞ ∈ Z(f). For exact gradient descent under A1–A5, determine whether the worst normalized nonasymptotic distance to the selected limit has the exact envelope C ⋆(χ,t)=1 throughout the strict safe class e<1. 

P075: Maxwell span under log-Lipschitz curvature Problem. H(s)=s log s-s+1 for s >0. Extend A by one outside [1/4,2] and let GA be the unique C2 function satisfying GA(1) = GA‘(1)=0 and 

GA”(s)=A(s)/s. Set FA(s) = GA(s)-H(s)/2 and P hi A, q (s) = FA(s)-q(s-1). Then FA’ ’(s)=(A(s)-1/2)/s. A pair (u,v), 0 < u< v, is a Maxwell pair if some real q satisfies P hi A, q (u) = P hi A, q (v) = min s> 0 P hi A,q(s). For J=[ell,rgt], let ∆(A) be the supremum of log(v/u) over all Maxwell pairs and set Sigma(A,J)= ∆(A)/log(rgt/ell). 

Lip log (A) is the least M in [0, ∞] such that | log A(s)-log A(t) |≤ M| log s-log t | for all s,t in [1/4,2]. Let σ(M ) be the infimum of Sigma(A,J) over all admis-sible pairs with Lip log (A) ≤M, and set σ(M ) = ∞ if this class is empty. For each admissible A and positive integer k, prescribe 

hk’‘( εk s)=A(s)/( εk s) on [ εk/4, 2epsilon k], set hk’‘=h” out-side, and match hk to h on the left exterior component. The two support moments imply equality on the right exterior component. The ambient space is finite-dimensional, and h and every 

hk are Legendre functions with the same nonempty open convex interior domain Ω.Each kernel is twice continuously differentiable and has positive-definite Hessian on Ω, while hk converges to h in C1 on every fixed compact subset of Ω; no uniform Hessian or divergence comparison is assumed near the boundary. The objective f is fixed, proper, lower-semicontinuous, and prox-bounded relative to the reference kernel h. There are attentive graph points ( xk, v k) with vk in the lim-iting subdifferential of f at xk, x k approaching the boundary of Ω, shrinking neighborhoods Uk, and a constant r such that f(z) is at least f(x)+ < v,z-x > −rD h(z, x ) for every suf-ficiently large k and every authorized attentive graph point (x,v) and z in Uk.The proximal parameter λ is fixed and positive with λ r<1, and all localized subproblems under consideration remain inside Ω.Use A1-A5 in dimension one with the fixed entropy land-scape h(t)=t log t, f(t)=-(t log t)/2, λ=1, and shrinking anchors 

xk = 2 (−k). For each M, optimize the global Maxwell-span ratio over continuous exact-support profiles on [1/4,2] hav-ing a logarithmically wide subthreshold interval and intrinsic log-Lipschitz distortion at most M. The target is a two-sided asymptotic rate for the excess over seven sixths, not a positive M-independent gap. For t >0 set h(t)=t log t and f(t)=-(t log t)/2; set h(0)=f(0)=0 and both functions to + ∞ for t <0. Let Ω = (0 , ∞), λ =1, ε k = 2 (−k), x k = εk, and vk=f’( xk). A is continuous on [1/4,2], equals one near both endpoints, satisfies 1/4 ≤A(s) ≤5/4, and obeys integral_ 

1/4, 2

(A(s)-1)ds=0 and integral_ 

1/4, 2

(A(s)-1)ds/s=0. J=[ell,rgt] is contained in [1/2,1], log(rgt/ell) ≥1/8, and A(s) ≤3/8 for every s in J. A Maxwell pair consists of distinct global minimizers over (0, ∞) for one common tilt, and ∆(A) is the supremum of their logarithmic separations. For M >0 require | log A(s)-log A(t) |≤ M| log s-log t | for all s,t in [1/4,2]. Determine whether imposing an intrinsic log-Lipschitz bound M on exact-support curvature profiles makes the op-timal excess Maxwell span above seven sixths decay at the sharp order 1/M. 

P076: Square-root gluing of clique moments Problem. For q=(x,w), b1(q)=(1,x,w), 

b2(q)=(1,x,w, x2,xw, w2), M1(y)= Ly (bT

> 1b, 1

), and 

M2(y)= Ly (bT

> 2b, 2

). The box localizers are Ly ((1 − x2)bT

> 1b, 1

)and Ly ((1 − w2)bT

> 1b, 1

). 

Fκ,δ is the set of normalized pairs (yL,yR)satisfying the moment and box-localizing positive-semidefinite constraints, yL(xr )= yR(xr )for 0≤r≤4, λ2(M1(yL)), λ2(M1(yR)) ≥ κ, and 

λ3(M2(yL)), λ3(M2(yR)) ≤ δ.G is the set of pairs of degree-four clique marginals in-duced by Borel probability measures on [-1,1] 3.

∆(yL,yR)=max{ λ3(M2(yL)), λ3(M2(yR))}. H_ κ(δ)=sup{inf{ ∥y-g ∥2:g in G}:y in Fκ,δ }. 

yL and yR are real degree-four truncated moment se-quences on variables (x,u) and (x,v), respectively, normalized by yL(1)= yR(1)=1. For each clique, the order-two moment matrix and the order-one localizing matrices for its applicable box polyno-mials 1-x2, 1-u2, and 1-v2 are positive semidefinite. The separator moments agree exactly: yL(xj )= yR(xj ) for every integer 0 ≤j≤4. For each clique, the second-largest eigenvalue of the degree-one moment block is at least the fixed κ, and the third-largest eigenvalue of the order-two moment matrix is at most δ; eigenvalues are ordered nonincreasingly. The ambient vector contains every recorded degree-at-most-four moment from both cliques, distance is its Eu-clidean norm, and objective coefficients are restricted to the corresponding Euclidean unit ball. The conditioning level κ is fixed with 0 < κ < 1, δ is non-negative, and G consists of the degree-four clique marginals of all probability measures on [-1,1] 3 without imposing an extraction algorithm or an auxiliary low-rank approximation. Degree-four truncated moments on the two cliques (x,u) and (x,v), order-two moment matrices, order-one box local-izers, exact separator agreement through degree four, fixed Euclidean moment coordinates, and no assumptions beyond A1-A6. For q=(x,w), use b1(q)=(1,x,w) and 

b2(q)=(1,x,w, x2,xw, w2); M1(y)= Ly (bT

> 1b, 1

) and 

M2(y)= Ly (bT

> 2b, 2

). The actual defect is 

∆( yL, y R) = max {λ3(M2(yL)) , λ 3(M2(yR)) } .

Distance is taken in the complete, nonduplicated pair of clique moment coordinates specified by A5. Every sharpness witness must lie outside G, retain one fixed κ, and be separated from every point of G. For each κ, all upper-bound constants and all sharpness witnesses are chosen before the universally quantified upper-bound variable δ and sequence index j. For every fixed κ in (0,1), the following conjunction is asserted. First, there exist C( κ)>0 and δ0(κ)>0 such that, for every δ in [0, δ0(κ)], H_ κ(δ)≤C( κ)√δ. Second, there exist c( κ)>0 and sequences δj >0 and yj such that δj de-creases to zero, yj belongs to Fκ,δ j minus G, ∆(yj )= δj , and 

dist 2(yj ,G) ≥c( κ)√δj for every positive integer j. 

P077: Zero-memory delayed gradient tracking Problem. m⋆,max denotes m⋆(2 , 2, 1; 1 , 1, 1/2) under 

SC U N ION,ACT IV E,DELIV ERY and the maximal local up-date interpretation. GoodMax( pi 0, α ,C, ρ,schedule,r, xinitial ) means that the A5 execution has an exact two-periodic limiting orbit with both limiting primal coordinates equal to ( r1 + r2)/2, both limiting trackers zero, and the A5 relative Euclidean estimate with constants C and ρ for every k ≥0. Exact0Max( pi 0) means that there exists ¯α >0 such that for every α in (0, ¯α) there exist finite Cα and ρα

in (0,1) for which GoodMax holds for every schedule in 

DU N ION,SCHEDU LES and every r, xinitial in R2.Fix n ≥2, P ≥2, D ≥ 1, 0 < μ ≤L, and 0 < η ≤1/2. An admissible schedule consists of P-periodic matrices A(k) and B(k), where periodicity does not require fundamental period P. Each A(k) is row-stochastic, each B(k) is column-stochastic, all diagonal entries are positive, every positive entry is at least η, and the period-union supports of A and B are separately strongly connected. For every ordered nonself edge active at round k, exactly one packet of age dji (k) in {0,. . . ,D} is delivered, with P-periodic ages; distinct-edge deliveries commute and an edge receives at most one packet per round. This class is nonempty because every phase may use self-weight 1/2 and weight 1/2 on a directed cycle, with any allowed periodic delay pattern. Each node has fi(x) = hi(x − ri)2/2 on the real line, where μ ≤ hi ≤L and ri is arbitrary. The target is x ⋆ =(P 

> i

hiri)/(P 

> i

hi). Node i knows hi, while other curvatures and centers are not globally available. At the beginning of round k, node j forms exactly the packet 

pj (k) = ( xj (k), y j (k)). Node i has exactly two persistent node coordinates xi(k), y i(k), and for every possible ordered nonself edge (j,i) it has one baseline overwrite register bji (k)

in R2 and one auxiliary register uji (k) in Rm. No other persistent node-local, edge-local, global, counter, clock, or controller state is permitted. Scheduled packets are delivered before the state update and overwrite their corresponding bji 

registers; inactive registers retain their values. Packets carry no timestamp, generation index, delay label, counter, or other metadata. Phase, current incident weights, and edge activity are transiently observable, but realized delays are not. For each m, one protocol P i m is chosen after n,P,D, μ,L, η

are fixed but before the schedule, objectives, centers, initial-ization, and stepsize are chosen. It consists of determinis-tic local coefficient functions defining phase-indexed linear maps: xi(k + 1) is linear in xi(k), y i(k), and current incom-ing bji (k), u ji (k); after forming the local gradient difference 

hi(xi(k+1)-xi(k)), a second linear map produces yi(k + 1) 

and uji (k + 1) . Coefficients may depend only on α, phase k modulo P, hi, and current incident entries of A(k), B(k). They may not depend on centers, past arrivals except through de-clared state, realized delay labels, future weights or delays, or the complete schedule. On zero-delay schedules, admissible laws must preserve P 

> i

yi(k) = P 

> i

gradient fi(xi(k)) under tracker-consistent initialization and preserve every common-optimizer fixed trajectory; these are baseline restrictions, not assumptions of delayed exactness. For k=-D,. . . ,0 set xi(k) = x0 

> i

, y i(k) = hi(x0 

> i

−

ri), p i(k)=( x0 

> i

, y i(k)) , b ji (0) = pj (0), and uji (0) =0. Let z(k) be the Euclidean vector of all declared persistent coordi-nates immediately after round-k deliveries and before the round-k update. For a fixed protocol, uniform exact linear convergence means that there exist ¯α > 0 and, for every α

in (0, ¯α), constants Cα < +∞ and ρα in (0,1), independent of the admissible schedule, centers, allowed curvatures, and 

x0, such that each execution has an exact P-periodic limit-ing orbit z∞ with all limiting primal coordinates equal to 

x⋆ and all limiting tracker coordinates zero, and norm(z(k)-

z∞(kmoduloP )) 2 ≤ Cαρkα norm(z(0)-z∞(0)) 2 for every k≥0. Define m⋆ (n,P,D; μ,L, η)=inf{m in the nonnegative in-tegers: one such P i m exists}, with infimum of the empty set equal to + ∞.Use A1-A5 with n=2, P=2, D=1, μ=L=1, η=1/2, and m=0. An ordered nonself edge (j,i) is active exactly when 

Aij (k) >0 or Bij (k) >0. Its single delivered packet pj (k-

dji (k)) overwrites bji before the update. The second local map may use every currently available local quantity listed in SC M AXIM AL,SECON D,M AP,SIGN AT U RE .At round k, E(k) consists of the ordered nonself edges (j,i) for which Aij (k) >0 or Bij (k) >0. Each edge in E(k) delivers exactly pj (k-dji (k)) before the update, using one common age if both entries are positive; an edge outside E(k) makes no delivery and retains bji .For m=0, after xi(k + 1) and δg,i (k) = hi(xi(k+1)-xi(k)) are formed, yi(k + 1) may be any linear function of xi(k), y i(k), x i(k + 1) , δ g,i (k), and all current incoming overwrite registers bji (k).Coefficients may be node-indexed and incoming-edge-indexed, subject to A4’s restrictions on their observable argu-ments; they remain independent of centers, hidden ages, past arrivals outside declared state, future data, and the complete schedule. In the fixed two-agent, two-phase, one-delay cell, with union-active packet delivery and the maximal local linear input signature specified below, determine whether every zero-additional-memory protocol fails uniform exact linear convergence. 

P078: From tangent injectivity to a global rank-two gap Problem. PΩ retains entries indexed by Ω and sets all other entries to zero. 

αΩ(X)=inf over nonzero H in TX of ∥PΩ

H∥F /( √(p) ∥H∥F ). 

βΩ(X)=inf over Y in K(n, μ,κ), Y distinct from X, of 

∥PΩ(Y-X) ∥F /( √(p) ∥Y-X ∥F ). 

ET (X) is the event αΩ(X) ≥a. For universally quantified L in (0, ∞), m=ceil(L μ n log n) and p=m/ n2.n is at least 4, Ω is sampled uniformly without replacement from [n] ×[n] with | Ω |=m, and p=m/n 2.

μ and κ are fixed parameters with μ at least 1 and κ finite; K(n, μ,κ) consists of real n by n matrices of exact rank two, Frobenius norm one, condition number at most κ, and left and right rank-two leverage scores at most 2 μ/n. The target X belongs to K(n, μ,κ), and TX is the tangent space of the exact-rank-two manifold at X. For a fixed constant a >0, every H in TX satisfies ∥P_ ΩH∥F

at least a √(p) ∥H∥F .Candidate competing completions Y are finite matrices in the same class K(n, μ,κ); limiting tangent vectors, rank-deficient endpoints, and matrices whose condition number diverges are not admissible global witnesses. The target is pointwise in a deterministic X chosen before sampling. It concerns the conditional distribution of uni-formly sampled fixed-size observation sets at the order-μ nlog n scale. Competitors are all distinct finite matrices in the same normalized exact-rank-two, incoherent, bounded-condition class. Rank-deficient endpoints, divergent condi-tion numbers, tangent vectors, and merely local competitors are excluded. For each n, X is deterministic and fixed before Ω is sam-pled; the theorem is not a simultaneous uniform assertion over sample-adaptive targets. The probability statement is conditional on αΩ(X) ≥a and is required only when this event has positive probability. The global modulus takes the infimum over every Y in K(n, μ,κ) distinct from X, including remote isolated comple-tions. The lower-gap constant may depend on μ, κ, a, and L but not on n, X, or the realized Ω.The symbol L is a universally quantified real sampling coefficient in (0, ∞), and the schedule is defined by m=ceil(L 

μ n log n) and p=m/ n2.Fix μ ≥1, κ ≥1, a>0, and a sampling coefficient L>0. For each sufficiently large n set m=ceil(L μ n log n), p=m/ n2,and sample Ω uniformly without replacement. Determine whether, for every deterministic X in K(n, μ,κ), quantitative injectivity on TX conditionally forces a dimension-uniform global secant gap with polynomially high conditional prob-ability. 

P079: Pointwise stability of clipped proximal SAGA Problem. Let 

Φ( x) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

fi(x) + r(x),

and let x⋆ be its unique minimizer. Set 

ηt = min 

 14Lmax 

, 2

μ(t + t0)



, τt = cτ (t + t0)1/q ,

where cτ = C(q, n, p min , μ, L max , (σi)ni=1 ).Initialize hi, 0 = 0 . At time t, draw It from pt and set 

¯ht = 1

n

X

> i

hi,t , Zt = GIt (xt),Yt = ¯ht + Zt − hIt,t 

np It,t 

, vt = clip τt (Yt),xt+1 = prox ηtr (xt − ηtvt).

Only hIt,t is replaced by clip τt (Zt).Finally, define 

Ht = 1

n

X

> i

∥hi,t − ∇ fi(xt)∥q .SC (q, instance) = sup 

> p

sup 

> t≥0

max E[Ht],

(t + t0)2( q−1) /q E∥xt − x⋆∥2 ,

where p ranges over all admissible predictable sampling rules. The objective is Φ( x) = n−1 Pni=1 fi(x)+r(x) on a finite-dimensional Euclidean space, and x0 belongs to dom(r). Each fi is convex with Li-Lipschitz gradient, their average is μ-strongly convex for μ > 0, and r is proper, closed, convex, and has an exactly evaluable proximal map. A query to component i at x returns Gi(x) = ∇fi(x)+ xi i.For one fixed q in (1,2), E[ xi i given the pre-query history and It=i]=0 and E[ ∥xi i∥q given that information] ≤ σqi ; no second moment is assumed. Before query t, pt is measurable with respect to the pre-query history, 0 < p min ≤1/n, pi,t ≥ pmin for every i, and 

It has conditional distribution pt. The target is uniform over all such predictable rules, including pi,t =1/n. Fresh oracle noise obeys A3 conditional on the past and selected component at every queried point. The algorithm is exactly the recursion in central object .Importance weighting occurs before clipping, clipping oc-curs only in the displayed estimator and table updates, and the same noisy query Zt is shared by both uses. The stepsizes are ηt=min{1/( 4Lmax ), 2/[μ(t+ t0)]} with 

t0 ≥ 8Lmax /μ . An admissible threshold rule C maps only (q,n, pmin , μ, L max , (σi)ni=1 ) to a finite cτ in (0, ∞), before any oracle draws, and τt = cτ (t + t0)1/q . The same selected 

cτ is used when comparing adaptive and uniform sampling. Complexity counts every noisy component query. The exact A1-A7 shared-query clipped proximal SAGA recursion. Unlike the previous averaged expected-objective frontier, this generation concerns pointwise squared distance and table q-energy; it neither assumes nor directly asserts an objective-gap bound for the nonsmooth composite objective. Use exactly the estimator, clipping, proximal update, and shared-query table refresh specified by A6. C maps only (q,n, pmin , μ, L max , (σi)) to a finite cτ >0and cannot depend on t0, the initialization, component affine offsets, or realized history. The finite stability constant may depend on the fixed ad-missible instance, including x0, t 0, and the component gra-dients at the minimizer, but not on the predictable sampling rule or time. The target is the joint pointwise distance and table-energy observable, not the previously attempted weighted-average expected-objective observable. Determine whether one admissible strictly positive parameter-only threshold rule C, independent of the fixed schedule offset t0, simultaneously gives the critical pointwise mean-square decay and a uniformly bounded recycled-table q-energy for every A1-A7 instance and every admissible pre-dictable sampling rule. 

P080: A quadratic-tail bound for binary OMWU Problem. Set α1=A11-A21, α0=A12-A22, β1=B11-B12, and β0=B21-B22. Define α(q) = α1 q+ α0(1 − q) and 

β(p) = β1 p+ β0(1 − p).For pt = xt

> 1

, q t = yt

> 1

, z t=log( pt/(1 − pt)), and 

wt=log( qt/(1 − qt)), define zt+1 = zt+η(2alpha( qt) −

α(qt−1)) and wt+1 = wt+η(2beta( pt) − β(pt−1)). Define q ⋆ = −α0/(α1 − α0) and p ⋆ = −β0/(β1 − β0). Under SC CY CLIC,SIGN,CELL , (p⋆, q⋆ ) is the unique com-pletely mixed Nash equilibrium. Define γ(A, B )=min{ | α0 |, | α1 |, | β0 |, | β1 |} and 

ρ(A, B )=min{ p⋆, 1 − p⋆, q⋆, 1 − q⋆ }. Define Hinit =max{ | z−1 |, | z0 |, | w−1 |, | w0 |}. Let dN (t) be the Euclidean distance of ( xt, y t) from the unique mixed Nash equilibrium. Define Tε as the least non-negative integer T such that dN (t) ≤ ε for every integer t ≥T, with value ∞ if no such T exists. Define Rquad = η(−2) γ(A, B )(−2) ρ(A, B )(−2) ((1 + 

Hinit )2+log(1/ ε)). There are exactly two players and two pure actions per player, with row-player payoff matrix A and column-player payoff matrix B, and every payoff entry lies in [-1,1]. For every integer t ≥0, player i uses the exact entropic opti-mistic multiplicative-weights update x(t+1)  

> i

(a) proportional to xti(a) exp( η times (2 ui(a, xt

> −i

) − ui(a, x(t−1)  

> −i

))), with one common constant stepsize η and no projection, truncation, or noise. The stepsize satisfies 0 < η ≤1/16 under the payoff normal-ization in A1. Both prescribed strategy profiles at times -1 and 0 are strictly interior. The game is standard nondegenerate in the two-action sense: against each pure action of the opponent, a player’s two pure actions have unequal payoffs. Equivalently here, 

γ(A, B ) >0. Games satisfy A1-A5 and have opposite-sign endpoint gaps for both players with opposite gap slopes, so they pos-sess a unique completely mixed Nash equilibrium. All finite two-profile histories and all η in (0,1/16] are allowed. The target is quantitative: it strengthens established qualitative Nash-set convergence and repairs the false linear-radius rate by using the quadratic radius forced by the matching-pennies boundary excursion. Writing α1=A11-A21, α0=A12-A22, β1=B11-B12, and 

β0=B21-B22, require α0α1 < 0, β 0β1 <0, and ( α1 −

α0)( β1 − β0) <0. The bound uses the actual quantities γ(A, B ) and ρ(A, B ),not auxiliary lower bounds. 

Hinit is the maximum absolute value of all four log odds prescribed at times -1 and 0. The initialization contribution is (1 + Hinit )2 rather than 1+ Hinit .

Tε is the least time after which every later iterate is ε-close to the unique Nash equilibrium. Determine whether every cyclic-cell exact binary bimatrix OMWU orbit admits a universal eventual Nash-tail bound that is quadratic in the complete initial log-odds radius and explicitly controlled by the stepsize, payoff-gap margin, equilibrium-interiority margin, and accuracy. 

P081: The scaling crossover for a single bias jump Problem. For an admissible objective and bias, a query at x returns y(x)=f(x)+b(x), and repeated queries return the same value. The simple regret of an output x ˆ is f(x ˆ)-min x∈[0 ,1] f(x). 

Rstep N (L, δ) is the infimum over deterministic N-query al-gorithms of the supremum, over all f, τ, c minus , and cplus 

authorized by A1-A4, of the simple regret. A function Φ is a universal scaling limit at q when, for every L >0 and every pair of sequences Nj tending to 

∞ and δj ≥0 satisfying Nj δj /L tending to q, the values 

Nj Rstep Nj (L, δj )/L tend to Φ( q).The objective f:[0,1] to the real numbers is L-Lipschitz for a known L >0. The bias has the fixed form b(x) = c− for x < τ and 

b(x) = c+ for x ≥ τ , where τ is in (0,1) and | c− |, | c+ | are at most δ.A deterministic algorithm chooses N query points adap-tively, observes y(x)=f(x)+b(x), and repeated queries receive the same value. After N queries the algorithm may output any point of [0,1], and performance is f(x ˆ)-min x∈[0 ,1] f(x) under the quan-tifier order infimum over algorithms followed by supremum over admissible f and b. One-dimensional L-Lipschitz objectives, one fixed two-level bias with a strictly interior jump, positive integer query budgets, deterministic adaptive queries, and arbitrary output points. The problem concerns finite-q scaling rather than merely the order L/N bound. N is a positive integer, L >0, and δ ≥0. The jump satisfies τ in (0,1), with b( τ ) = cplus as pre-scribed by A2. The same function Φ must govern every positive-integer sequence Nj tending to ∞ and every δj ≥0 satisfying Nj δj /L tending to the same q. Determine whether there exist one function Φ : [0 , ∞) to [1/2,5/2] and one finite q⋆ >0 such that, for every L>0, every q≥0, every sequence of positive integers Nj tending to ∞,and every sequence δj ≥0 satisfying Nj δj /L tending to q, the normalized radius Nj Rstep Nj (L, δj )/L tends to Φ( q), with 

Φ(0) =1/2 and Φ( q⋆ )>1/2. 

P082: The fixed-confidence resolution constant Problem. L=1, σ = 1 , β =r γ, ε =(2r+1) γ, and α = α0.

ad = d/ (d + 2) , Cd = 2 (1 −d)a(−d) 

> d

(1 − ad)(−2) 

Sd,r,α 0 (γ) = γ(d+2) N ⋆ (d, 1, rγ, 1, (2 r + 1) γ, α 0)

The dimension d is a positive integer, the domain is [0,1] d with the ∞ norm, and f is an unknown real-valued L-Lipschitz function with known L >0. At query xt the oracle returns Yt=f( xt)+b( xt)+ xi t, where b is one fixed unknown function throughout the transcript, 

sup x | b(x) |≤ β, β ≥0 is known, and b has no assumed regularity. For every admissible oracle law, the variables 

xi t are independent and centered and satisfy E[exp( λxi t)] ≤exp( σ2λ2/2) for every real λ, with known 

σ ≥0; the guarantee is uniform over all laws satisfying this condition. The algorithm is deterministic and adaptive, may repeat query points, uses a budget N in {0,1,2,. . . }, and outputs a point in [0,1] d; when N=0 its output is fixed before observing the oracle. The budget N ⋆ is the smallest nonnegative N for which one algorithm, uniformly over every admissible f, fixed b, and noise law, outputs x ˆ satisfying f(x ˆ)-min x f(x) ≤ ε with probability at least 1-α.The active strip has 0 < α ≤ 1/4, 0 ≤ β < L/4, γ =

ε − 2β > 0, and ε = 2 β + γ < L/2. The regimes ε ≥L/2, 

ε < min{2 β,L/2}, and all equality endpoints are classified separately and are not included in the active-rate claim. Deterministic adaptive value-query algorithms under A1-A6 on the ∞-norm unit cube. The parameters d, r, and α0 are fixed while γ decreases to zero through 0 < γ < 1/[2(2r+1)]. The guarantee is uniform over every fixed bias field and every independent centered 1-sub-Gaussian noise law. This fixed-confidence regime is not the established polynomial-confidence ray α = γλ.Set L=1, σ = 1 , β =r γ, ε =(2r+1) γ, and α = α0 for fixed d in {1,2,. . . }, r ≥0, and α0 in (0,1/4]. Restrict γ to 0 < γ < 1/[2(2r+1)]. The same deterministic capped algorithm must work for every fixed field b with sup x | b(x) |≤ r γ and every noise law authorized by A3. Fix a positive integer d, a bias ratio r ≥0, and a con-stant failure probability α0 in (0,1/4]. With L = σ =1, β =r γ, and ε=(2r+1) γ, determine whether γ(d+2) N ⋆ (d,1,r 

γ,1,(2r+1) γ, α 0) converges as γ decreases to zero to Cd

log(1/ α0), where ad=d/(d+2) and Cd = 2 (1 −d)a(−d) 

> d

(1 −

ad)(−2) .

P083: Phase-dependent feedback from a stopped HJB equation Problem. L(r)=log(e/r). 

z0(r)=r and z1(r)=1-r. 

Di(r)=L(r)(1/2-ah(0, zi(r))). The state domain is (0,1), σ > 0 is constant, the action set is [0,A] with A > σ 2/2, τ is the first hitting time of 0 or 1, and the process is stopped at τ without reflection or boundary intervention. Before τ , dX t=at(1-2Xt)/[ Xt(1-Xt)]dt+ σdW t. Admissi-ble controls are progressively measurable [0,A]-valued pro-cesses for which a weak solution exists up to τ ; admissibility does not require invariance. For starting phase s and state x, the horizon-H cost is the expected running cost R H∧τs [q( Xr )+ λa 2 

> r

]dr, plus g( XH ) on {τ > H}, plus h0(τ ) or h1(τ ) upon exit at 0 or 1. Here 

λ > 0; q and g are symmetric, lower-bounded, continuous on [0,1], and sufficiently regular in the interior; h0 and h1 are continuous; and hi(H)=g(i). For the data under study, the value V is assumed to be the unique continuous viscosity solution, with interior C1,2

regularity, of Vs+(σ2/2) Vxx +q(x)+ min 0≤a≤A{λa2+a (1 −

2x)Vx/[x(1-x)]}=0, with V(H,x)=g(x) and V(s,i)= hi(s) for i∈{0,1}. The canonical feedback aH (s,x) is the unique minimizer, namely the projection onto [0,A] of -(1 −

2x)Vx/[2 λx(1-x)]; no viability or boundary expansion is as-sumed. Fix 0 < ∆≤H. On every interval [k ∆,(k+1) ∆), the con-troller applies aH (t-k ∆,Xt), so every phase s ∈[0, ∆) recurs indefinitely. The SDE driven by the periodically reset canonical feed-back has a weak solution unique in law up to τ .Specialize A1-A6 to σ=λ=A=H= ∆=1 and equal exit data 

h0=h1. The problem is an existence question for autonomous HJB data, not a conditional accessibility theorem for a pre-scribed feedback. The data must satisfy A4 uniqueness and A6 weak uniqueness; the reset profile and later zero-control slab must both arise from the canonical projected minimizer. Set σ=λ=A=H= ∆=1 and require h0=h1=h. Require q and g to belong to C([0,1]) intersect C2((0,1)), to be symmetric and lower bounded, with derivatives through order two bounded on compact subsets of (0,1). Require h in 

C1([0,1]) and h(1)=g(0)=g(1). For i in {0,1}, the reset-phase deficit Di(r)=L(r)(1/2-

ah(0, zi(r))) tends to 1/4 as r decreases to zero. There exists r0 in (0,1/4) such that ah(s,x)=0 whenever s is in [1/3,2/3] and x belongs to (0, r0) union (1-r0,1). There exists a rational pcert in (0,1) such that 

P1/2(τ ≤2/3) ≥ pcert .Prove or refute that autonomous symmetric stopped-HJB data can generate a genuinely phase-dependent canonical feedback which has the statically inaccessible logarithmic coefficient 1/4 at reset phase, becomes identically zero in a fixed boundary neighborhood during a later positive-duration recurring phase slab, and consequently yields a quantitative finite-time exit witness. 

P084: Weak-only convergence from atomic metric growth Problem. For the standard basis ( en), D en = n−1en

and A(u,v)=(0,Dv). Thus ker (A) = ℓ2(N )⊕{0} is infinite-dimensional and ran(A) is nonclosed. (w ⊗w)z= ⟨z,w ⟩w. 

Mk=I+ Pj<k aj (wj ⊗wj ). The Bessel budget gives I ≼

Mk ≼ (1 + C)I and Mk+1 ≽ Mk.

xk⇀0 means ⟨xk, test vector ⟩→ 0 for every test vector ∈H. Failure of strong convergence to zero means that some 

ε > 0 and subsequence kj satisfy ∥xkj ∥≥ ε.For a fixed metric value M occurring in the schedule, a frozen replay is yr+1 = ( I + MA) −1yr .H is a separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert space. A:H →H is bounded, self-adjoint, positive semidefi-nite, and maximally monotone, with nonempty infinite-dimensional kernel and nonclosed range. The iterates are exact and satisfy xk+1 = Jck Mk Axk with 0< c min ≤ ck ≤ cmax < ∞.Every Mk is bounded, self-adjoint, and uniformly positive definite, with mI ≼ Mk ≼MI for fixed 0 < m≤M< ∞.There are ηk ≥0 with Pkηk < ∞ such that (1 + 

ηk)−1Mk ≼ Mk+1 for every k. There are no errors, relaxation, inertia, anchoring projec-tions, or iteration-dependent operators. Let H = ℓ2(N )⊕ℓ2(N ) and A(u,v)=(0,Dv), where D 

en = n−1en. Consider exact iterations xk+1 = (I +

MkA )−1xk with M0=I and Mk+1 = Mk + ak(wk⊗wk), where ak >0, ∥wk∥=1, and the weighted atoms have a uni-form Bessel bound. Thus the metrics are uniformly condi-tioned and satisfy A5 with ηk=0. No upper relative Loewner inequality, summable atomic-mass condition, relaxation, or iteration-dependent operator is allowed. 

H = ℓ2(N )⊕ℓ2(N ) and A(u,v)=(0,Dv), with D en =

n−1en.

M0=I and Mk+1 = Mk + ak(wk⊗wk) for positive ak and unit vectors wk.There is C < ∞ such that Pj≥0aj |⟨ z, wj ⟩| 2≤C∥z∥2 for every z ∈H. 

ck=1 for every k and ηk=0 verifies A5. No condition Pkak < ∞ or upper relative Loewner in-equality may be imposed. Determine whether weak-only convergence can occur for the canonical diagonal nonclosed-range operator when the proximal parameter is constant and the metric grows only through uniformly Bessel-bounded positive rank-one incre-ments. 

P085: Moment contraction with unstable growing epochs Problem. Set c = (1 + ηλ )(−1) , so prox ηψ (y)=cy. Define ρ1(μ, λ ,η)= sup ∥x∥=1 E[ ∥c(I-ηH)x ∥(3 /2) ]. For one epoch write xt = Kt ex, K 0=I, Bt=c(I-ηH t), and 

Dt = Kt-I. Then Dt+1 = BtD,t -c η(λI+A), where A is that epoch’s frozen snapshot Hessian. For m≥ 1, K m=I-c ηPm−1 

> j=0

Bm−1Bm−2. . . Bj+1 (λI+A), with the product interpreted as I when j=m-1. The dimension is two, q=3/2, u is uniform on {e1,(e1+e2)/ √(2)}, and Z is independent of u with P(Z >

t)= t(−7/4) for t ≥1. Each stochastic loss is fZ,u (x) = xT Hx/2 with H =

μ I+Z uu T , where μ >0, and the composite term is 

ψ(x)= λ∥x∥2/2 with λ > 0. At every epoch, the snapshot Hessian As and all inner Hessians Hs,t are mutually independent copies of H and are independent of the past. The recursion is exactly xs, 0 = exs, v s,t =

Hs,t (xs,t − exs) + As exs, x s,t +1 = prox ηψ (xs,t -η v s,t ), and 

ex(s+1)=x (s, ms), with fixed η> 0 and last-inner-iterate re-porting. The growing-epoch experiment uses ms=s+1 and deter-ministic initialization ex0=e2; the comparison experiment uses ms=1 with the same law and parameters. Only the two-dimensional Pareto-curvature proximal snapshot recursion of A1-A5 is considered. The Pareto expo-nent is 7/4, q=3/2, the two directions are e1 and (e1+e2)/ √(2), the snapshot batch has size one, the stepsize is fixed, and each epoch reports its last inner iterate. Use H = μI+ Zuu T with exactly the distribution in A1; no truncation, batching, or commuting replacement is part of the target. With c = (1 + ηλ )(−1) , require ρ1(μ, λ ,η)= sup ∥x∥=1 

E[ ∥c(I-ηH)x ∥(3 /2) ] <1. For the instability experiment use ms=s+1, ex0=e2, and 

ex(s+1)=x (s, ms). Failure means that some ε >0 satisfies limsup s→∞ 

P( ∥exs∥> ε ) >0. Determine whether there exist μ > 0, λ >0, and η>0 in the model fixed by A1-A5 such that the one-step epoch map is a strict uniform 3/2-moment contraction while, for ms=s+1 and ex0=e2, the endpoint sequence fails to converge in prob-ability to zero. 

P086: The 1/8 deletion threshold for rank three Problem. Kn consists of real exact-rank-three matrices L=U ΣV T whose singular values lie in [1,2], whose left and right leverage scores are at most 6/n, and for which every unit a in R3 gives at least ceil(3n/4) coordinates of Ua and Va with magnitude at least 1/(100 √(n)). 

Γ⊆[n] ×[n] is α-admissible when every row and column contains at most floor( αn) elements of Γ.

βn(α) is the infimum of ∥P([ n]×[n]) minus (Γ 1union Γ2)(L-

L′)∥F /∥L-L′∥F over distinct L, L′ in Kn and separately α-admissible Γ1, Γ2.

τn=inf{ α in [0,1]: βn(α)=0}, with value + ∞ if the set is empty. κn is the infimum of α for which distinct L, L′

in Kn and separately α-admissible Γ1, Γ2 satisfy 

P([ n]×[n]) minus (Γ 1union Γ2)(L-L′)=0. For n=8m, repeat each phase θj =2 πj/8 exactly m times and give every corresponding row of F the value (1, √(2) cos 

θj ,√(2) sin θj )/ √(n). Dimensions satisfy n at least 32 and tend to ∞; every clean matrix is real, n-by-n, and of exact rank three. Each clean matrix has a singular-value decomposition L=U Sigma V T with all singular values in [1,2] and every left and right leverage score at most 6/n. Fix cs=1/100 and γs=3/4. For every unit a in R3, at least ceil(3n/4) coordinates of Ua and at least ceil(3n/4) coordi-nates of Va have magnitude at least 1/(100 √(n)). For each fixed C >0 and deterministic schedule pn in (0,1] with pn at least C log(n)/n eventually, entries are observed in-dependently with probability pn. Random-observation mod-uli use q = pn, full-observation moduli use q=1, empirical-density normalization is excluded, and the conjecture asks whether one absolute C0 makes the conclusion hold for ev-ery C at least C0; no sampling stability is assumed. The two competing corruption supports are subsets of the observed set and are separately α-admissible in every real-ized row and column; their locations and unbounded values may depend on the clean matrices and the observed set. Real n-by-n exact-rank-three matrices satisfying A1-A3, dimensions n=8m tending to ∞, complete observation with q=1, and two separately degree-capped deletion supports as authorized by A5. The lower bound ranges over all endpoint pairs in Kn, not only phase-structured pairs. Bernoulli sam-pling, estimators, and noise are excluded. Dimensions tend to ∞ through n=8m with m at least 4. Set Ω=[n] ×[n] and q=1 throughout. Each of Γ1 and Γ2 separately has at most floor( αn) entries in every row and column. The infimum defining βn ranges over every distinct pair in 

Kn and includes normalized limits of coalescing pairs. Distinguish τn, defined through βn=0, from the finite-collision threshold κn.For complete observation in dimensions n divisible by eight, determine whether the finite-collision and zero-modulus thresholds of Kn converge to 1/8 and whether ev-ery fixed margin below 1/8 has a dimension-uniform positive trimmed secant modulus. 

P087: The hard-safe signaling coefficient Problem. Set s ⋆(x)=2x/3 and u ⋆(x)=-x/3 for | x|≤ 3/4; set s⋆(x)=(x+1/4)/2 and u ⋆(x)=-(x-1/4)/2 for x ≥3/4, with the reflected formulas for x ≤-3/4. 

VPO (η) and VFS are the infima specified by A5, and direct full-state integration gives VFS =43/384. For η> 0 with finite VPO (η), set R(η) = ( VPO (η) −

VFS )/η 2.Set Chyb =7/24, the sum of the formal interior-overlap con-tribution 1/8 and outer exact-quantization contribution 1/6. X0 is uniform on [-1,1]. Independently, N is uniform on [-η,η] for 0 < η ≤3/4, and N=0 when η=0. Controller 1 observes X0 and chooses U0, after which X1=X0+U0. Controller 2 observes Y=X1+N and chooses U1, after which X2=X1+U1 and the horizon ends. The fixed bounds are | U0 |≤ 1/2, | U1 |≤ 1/2, | X1 |≤ 3/4, and | X2 |≤ 1/4. A partial-information behavioral policy consists of Borel probability kernels K0(du0 | x) specified for every x in [-1,1] and K1(du1 | y) specified for every y in the real line. For every x, every u0 in the topological support of K0 given x, every n in [-η,η] including endpoints, y=x+u0+n, and every u1 in the topological support of K1 given y, all bounds in A3 must hold. Private randomization is allowed, and Controller 2 has no access to X0, U0, or Controller 1’s randomization except through Y. 

VPO (η) is the infimum of E[ U 02 + U 12 + X22] over poli-cies admissible under A1-A4. VFS is the analogous infimum when Controller 2 observes X1 exactly and uses a pointwise Borel kernel specified for every X1, with all other bounds and supportwise requirements unchanged. The infimum of an empty admissible class is + ∞, and the value gap is con-sidered only when both values are finite. The fixed two-stage scalar model of A1-A5 for sufficiently small positive η, with endpoint-inclusive supportwise safety and the complete class of randomized, asymmetric, discon-tinuous, nonmonotone, and η-dependent Borel behavioral policies. Only η decreasing to zero through positive values for which the partial-information class is nonempty is consid-ered. No determinism, monotonicity, finite-range, continuity, or prescribed-cell restriction may be imposed on either con-troller. The number 7/24 must be derived from the optimized problem, not assumed through a hybrid-policy ansatz. Under A1-A5, prove or refute that the full-policy small-noise value gap satisfies lim as η decreases to zero of (VPO (η) − VFS )/η 2 = 7/24. 

P088: Convergence of variable-kernel Bregman proximal gradients Problem. For a differentiable convex kernel q, 

Dq (u, v )=q(u)-q(v)-< ∇ q(v),u-v >.F=f+g on C. 

Xstar = arg min x∈C F(x). 

xk+1 is the unique minimizer over x in C of g(x)+ < ∇

f( xk),x-xk > +(1 /τ k)Dhk (x, xk). C is a nonempty open convex subset of R2, and all iterates and comparison minimizers in the claim lie in C. The reference h and every hk are proper closed Legen-dre functions with int(dom h)=int(dom hk)=C and are twice continuously differentiable on C. For each k and xk in C, the displayed proximal-gradient subproblem has a unique minimizer xk+1 in C. g: R2 → (−∞ , +∞] is proper lower-semicontinuous and convex, f:C → R is continuously differentiable and convex, F=f+g is proper on C and bounded below there, and X ⋆ =arg min x∈C F(x) is nonempty. There is a finite constant L >0 such that L hk-f and L hk+f are convex on C for every k. There are constants 0< m≤M< ∞ such that m

Dh(u, v ) ≤ Dhk (u, v ) ≤M Dh(u, v ) for every integer k ≥0and every u,v in C. The iteration starts from x0 in C, is exact, uses τk in one fixed interval [ τmin , τ max ] with 0 < τ min ≤ τmax <1/L, and the Euclidean orbit ( xk) is bounded. Finite-dimensional convex optimization on the common open domain C contained in R2, with exact updates, uni-formly bounded stepsizes, two-sided relative smoothness, and all-pairs comparison of every changing Bregman di-vergence with one fixed reference divergence. No summable kernel-variation condition or additional Euclidean condition-ing may be assumed. The positive target quantifies over every instance satisfy-ing A1-A6 and every bounded exact orbit generated by that instance. A refuting instance must verify A5 for every ordered pair u,v in C and every k, not merely along the orbit. A refuting instance must have nonempty Xstar contained in C and every finite iterate must remain in C. Under exactly A1-A6, decide whether every bounded exact variable-kernel Bregman proximal-gradient orbit converges in Euclidean norm to a single point of Xstar. If this universal assertion is false, exhibit a fully assumption-checked two-dimensional instance whose orbit does not converge to any point of Xstar. 

P089: The endpoint stepsize under arbitrary delays Problem. x⋆ = ( b1 + b2 + b3)/3. Write pj = ( cxj , c yj ). At the start of round k, set uk 

> 10

= pk−1

if k ≥1 and dk−1=0 and set it to zero otherwise; set uk 

> 20

=

pk−2 if k ≥2 and dk−2=1 and set it to zero otherwise; set 

uk 

> 11

= pk−1 if k ≥1 and dk−1=1 and set it to zero otherwise. Their receiver labels are determined by j modulo three. The slots u20 and u10 , in that order when present, encode Qk[0], while u11 encodes Qk[1]. At the start of round k define Lk = ( xk-x ⋆1, y k, z k-x⋆1, h k-x ⋆1, e kx, e ky , u k

> 10

, u k

> 20

, u k

> 11

), in this order. The first six entries are three-vectors and the last three are paired scalar payloads, giving 24 scalar coordinates. 

Ek is the maximum absolute value of the 24 scalar coor-dinates of Lk.Agents are indexed modulo three, with successor s(i)=i+1 and predecessor p(i)=i-1. The primal channel uses half self-weight and half of the stored predecessor reconstruction, while the tracking channel retains half of an active agent’s post-delivery tracker mass and sends the other half to its successor. The computing agent at round k is ak=1+(k mod 3). Only 

ak performs a primal and gradient-difference computation; packet deliveries do not count as activations. At the end of round k, the active agent forms one paired packet Pk = ( ak,s( ak), c xk , c yk) and chooses dk in {0,1}; 

Pk is consumed at the start of round k+1+ dk, before that round’s computation. The delay word is an arbitrary element of {0,1} indexed by the nonnegative integers and need not be periodic. At the start of round k, Qk[0] and Qk[1] are multi-sets of packets scheduled for rounds k and k+1. Every packet in Qk[0] is delivered once and removed. After computation, the remaining queue is shifted and Pk is appended accord-ing to Qk+1 [0] = Qk[1] multiset-union { Pk if dk=0} and 

Qk+1 [1]={ Pk if dk=1}. The paired components share dk, no packet is consumed in its formation round, and packets on each edge are delivered FIFO. Let zkr be receiver r’s stored reconstruction of its pre-decessor’s primal state, hki sender i’s primal encoder ref-erence, and ex,k i , e y,k i sender i’s primal and tracking com-pression residuals. At the start of round k, for each re-ceiver r set bar zkr = zkr plus the sum of cx over packets in Qk[0] addressed to r, and bar ykr = ykr plus the cor-responding sum of cy . After these packets are consumed, set zk+1  

> r

=bar zkr for every r, so every delivered primal in-crement persists in the stored reconstruction. For i = ak

set xk+1  

> i

= (xki +bar zki )/2 − α bar yki and yk+1  

> i

=bar 

yki /2+[gradient fi(xk+1  

> i

)-gradient fi(xki )]; for j not equal to i set xk+1  

> j

= xkj and yk+1  

> j

=bar ykj . The active sender forms 

vxi = xk+1  

> i

− hki + ex,k i , c xk = qv xi , e x,k +1  

> i

= vxi − cxk , and 

hk+1  

> i

= hki +cxk , together with vyi =bar yki /2+ ey,k i , c yk = qv yi ,and ey,k +1  

> i

= vyi − cyk. All inactive encoder references and residuals remain unchanged, and Pk is inserted into the shifted queue exactly as prescribed in A3. Each objective is fi(x) = ( x − bi)2/2 on the real line, where the offsets bi are arbitrary, and the target optimizer is x⋆ = ( b1 + b2 + b3)/3. The stepsize α is constant and positive and q belongs to (0,1]. Initial primal states are arbitrary; y0 

> i

= x0 

> i

− bi, z 0 

> i

=

x0

> p(i)

, h 0 

> i

= x0 

> i

, both residuals are zero, and Q0[0] and Q0[1] are empty. The claim concerns the horizontal endpoint slice α=1/2, all q in [1/2,1), and every arbitrary admissible binary delay word. It is distinct from the established frozen-implies-switched result, whose stepsize scope excludes α=1/2, and from the previous q=1 frozen-boundary candidate. Fix α=1/2 and let 1/2 ≤q<1. Uniformity is over every infinite delay word d in {0,1} N0 ,without periodicity or frequency restrictions. Convergence and failure are evaluated on the canonical lifted states generated from A6 initializations; an obstruction must affect a declared lifted coordinate. The geometric constants may depend on q and need not remain bounded as q approaches 1. For the recurrence fixed by A1-A6 with α=1/2, every strict compression factor q in [1/2,1) yields delay-word-uniform geometric convergence of the complete initialized lifted er-ror state, although the uncompressed endpoint q=1 has a reachable periodic failure. 

P090: Strong convergence of Douglas–Rachford shadows Problem. For a positive-definite operator Q and operator C, 

JQC = ( I + Q−1C)−1. For C = NU this is the Q-orthogonal projection onto U. At iteration k, uk approximates JMk 

> A

zk, v k approximates 

JMk 

> B

(2 uk − zk), and zk+1 = zk + λk(vk − uk), as specified in A7. The shadow converges strongly to p when 

lim k→∞ ∥uk−p∥=0 in the ambient Hilbert norm. H is a separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert space. U and V are closed linear subspaces of H, A = NU , B =

NV , and zer(A+B)=U ∩V is nonempty. Each Mk is bounded, self-adjoint, and positive definite, and fixed constants 0 < m≤M< ∞ satisfy mI ≼ Mk ≼MI for every k. There are numbers ηk ≥0 such that Mk+1 ≼ (1 + ηk)Mk

for every k and Pk≥0ηk < ∞.The two metric-resolvent evaluations at iteration k have additive errors bounded in the ambient Hilbert norm by εAk

and εBk , where Pk≥0(εAk + εBk ) < ∞.The relaxation parameters satisfy 0 < λmin ≤ λk ≤

λmax <2 for every k. Starting from arbitrary z0 ∈H, choose uk with ∥uk −

JMk 

> A

zk∥≤ εAk , choose vk with ∥vk − JMk 

> B

(2 uk − zk)∥≤ 

εBk , and update zk+1 = zk + λk(vk − uk); all norms and convergence claims use the ambient Hilbert norm. Separable infinite-dimensional real Hilbert spaces, two closed linear subspaces, uniformly coercive variable met-rics satisfying summable one-sided Loewner drift, ambient-norm summable resolvent errors, and relaxations uniformly contained in (0,2). No operator-norm metric-variation, com-pactness, angle-gap, weak-convergence, or commutativity assumption is added. The problem quantifies over exactly the A1–A7 data and orbits, without strengthening A4 to summable operator-norm variation. All error bounds and convergence conclusions use the original Hilbert norm. A refuting orbit need only fail ambient-norm convergence to U ∩V; weak convergence is neither assumed nor required. Metrics and subspaces need not commute or admit a com-mon block diagonalization. Decide whether every orbit satisfying exactly A1–A7 has an ambient-norm limit p ∈ U ∩ V . Equivalently, determine whether an admissible orbit can have a shadow sequence uk

that fails to converge in ambient norm to every member of 

U ∩ V .

P091: Alternating moment circuits on an elliptic curve Problem. For D={ P1,. . . , PNd }, aD = ( a1,. . . , aNd ) is the unique kernel generator satisfying P 

> i

ai f( Pi)=0 for every f in Vd, normalized by P 

> ai>0

ai = P

> ai<0

(−ai)=1. The atomic-weight margin is ωd(D) = min i | ai |.If the points are in cyclic order, δ(D) is the minimum arclength of a consecutive cyclic arc divided by the total arclength of E. Define μD = P 

> ai>0

aiδPi and νD = P

> ai<0

(−ai)δPi .Alternation and even Nd give exactly rd atoms in each prob-ability measure, and the circuit identity gives equality of all 

Vd moments. The canonical robust lift assigns μD and νD to two clique-local atomic measures with private coordinates zero, retains moments through degree 2rd, and couples only their common 

Vd separator moments. Put pd = Nd-2 and Rd(D) = ωd(D)/δ (D)pd. The predi-cate Pd is: ∈ fD∈Ad Rd(D) >0; there exists a sequence Dk

in Ad with δ(Dk) tending to zero and sup k Rd(Dk) < ∞;and every D in Ad has the enumerated canonical flat-lift properties. The correlative sparsity graph admits a finite clique tree satisfying the running-intersection property. Each clique has a sufficiently high-order normalized trun-cated moment sequence satisfying its moment and localizing positivity constraints and an explicit flatness rank equality that yields a unique finitely atomic clique representing mea-sure. Every projected clique measure on a separator has at most r distinct atoms, all lying on the fixed oval E. For each clique-tree edge, with d ≥ 1, independent clique sequences are coupled by equality of the restrictions to E of all real polynomials of total degree at most d, and no higher-degree separator moments are implicitly identified merely because they are retained locally for flatness. All clique-local feasible sets are compact, and the equality 

y2 = (1 − x2)(2-x) together with -1 ≤ x ≤ 1 is imposed on each relevant separator projection. For odd d, Ad consists of cyclically ordered sets of Nd dis-tinct points whose Vd evaluation map has a one-dimensional left kernel generated by a vector with nonzero coefficients al-ternating in cyclic order. For even d, Ad consists of reduced all-oval zero divisors of nonzero real degree-d sections with their unique alternating residue dependence. Coefficients are normalized so each sign part has mass one. Constants may depend on d but not on D. The canonical lift has two cliques, private coordinates fixed to zero, local moments through de-gree 2rd, and cross-clique coupling on exactly Vd.

Nd=3d+1 for odd d and Nd=3d for even d, and every admissible circuit contains exactly Nd distinct cyclically or-dered points. The Vd evaluation kernel on D is one-dimensional and has a generator with nonzero coefficients alternating in cyclic order. 

δ(D) is the minimum intrinsic arclength between consec-utive cyclic points of D divided by the total arclength of E. The sparse lift consists of two cliques with separator vari-ables (x,y), one private coordinate fixed to zero in each clique, atomic moments through degree 2rd, and rank Mrd =rank 

Mrd−1 = rd.For pd = Nd-2 and Rd(D) = ωd(D)/δ (D)pd, P d is the conjunction of a positive uniform infimum for Rd, existence of a degenerating sequence on which Rd is bounded above, and the explicitly enumerated canonical-lift conclusion for every D. For each d ≥1, set Nd=3d+1 for odd d and Nd=3d for even d, rd = Nd/2, and pd = Nd-2. Let Ad be the ad-missible minimal alternating Vd-circuits specified below and 

Rd(D) = ωd(D)/δ (D)pd. Decide the single predicate Pd for every d: (i) ∈ fD∈Ad Rd(D)>0; (ii) there is a sequence Dk

in Ad with δ(Dk) tending to zero and sup k Rd(Dk) < ∞;and (iii) for every D in Ad, its two normalized sign mea-sures have exactly rd atoms, agree on Vd, obey the same weight lower bound, and their explicitly defined canonical two-clique lift satisfies A1-A5, rank Mrd =rank Mrd−1 = rd

in both cliques, and has no global representing measure with both distinct separator marginals. Thus the positive assertion is exactly forall d Pd and the refutation assertion is exactly exists d not Pd.P092: Quantitative compactification of a Maxwell graph Problem. Dz (y, x ) = hz (y) − hz (x) − hz ’(x)(y-x). 

Rz (y) = f (y) − f (0) + Dz (y, 0) 

A(y) = ∂z Dz (y, 0) evaluated at z=0. 

sz (x) = h′ 

> z

(x) − h′ 

> z

(0) ,f (y) + Dz (y, x ) − f (0) − Dz (0 , x ) = Rz (y) − sz (x)y. 

For real v, v+=max(v,0) and v−=max(-v,0). 

QEG q,β holds if there exist δ ∈ (0 , ρ ), ε > 0, γ > 0, L < 

∞, c + > 0, c − > 0, and real b+, b − such that the signwise errors in 

R0(y) = c+(y+)2q + c−(y−)2q + O(|y|2q+β )

and 

A(y) = b+(y+)q + b−(y−)q + O(|y|q+β )

are bounded by L with those powers; |∂zz Dz (y, 0) | ≤

L(|z| + |y|)β on the local box; Ψ( v) = c+(v+)2q +

c−(v−)2q +b+(v+)q +b−(v−)q has a unique nonzero global minimizer; and Ra(y) ≥ γ for 0 < a ≤ ε and δ ≤ | y| ≤ ρ.An admissible QEG q,β instance is a pair (f,h) satisfying the five cited base assumptions and every clause of QEG q,β .Z(a,s)=argmin over y in Iρ of Ra(y)-sy and V(a,s)=min over y in Iρ of Ra(y)-sy. The original localized proximal set is P(a,x)=Z(a, sa(x)). For a > 0 and (a, s )̸ = (0 , 0) , set 

r(a, s ) = a1/q + |s|1/(2 q−1) ,α(a, s ) = ar(a, s )q , ξ(a, s ) = sr(a, s )2q−1 .

and p(a, s ) = ( α(a, s ), ξ (a, s )) ∈ Kq .

C(v) = c+(v+)2q + c−(v−)2q , B (v) = b+(v+)q +

b−(v−)q , and Gp(v) = C(v) + αB (v) − ξv for p =(α, ξ ). Define M(p) = arg min v∈R Gp(v) and μ(p) =min v∈R Gp(v).

Graph M is the set of (p, v ) with p ∈ Kq and v ∈ M (p).Distances to Graph M and between parameter points are Euclidean. 

Xq is the set of p ∈ Kq for which M(p) contains at least two points. For nonempty subsets S,T of the real line, exc(S,T)=sup over u in S of inf over v in T of | u-v |.

BCG β holds at p⋆ with profile J if for every rn de-creasing to zero and pn = ( αn, xi n) in Kq converging to 

p⋆ , the functions r(−β) 

> n

{r(−2q) 

> n

[R_( αnrqn)( rn v)-xi nr(2 q) 

> n

v]-

Gpn (v)} converge locally uniformly in v to J(v). For an admissible instance and p ⋆ = ( α⋆, xi ⋆), Clust( p⋆ )is the set of v for which there exist rn decreasing to zero and 

yn in Z( α⋆rqn, xi ⋆r(2 q−1)  

> n

) such that yn/r n tends to v. The ambient space is the real line, the anchor center and kernel state are (x,z) = (0,0), λ = 1, and minimization is localized to a fixed interval [-ρ, ρ ]. The objective f is proper and lower semicontinuous, is finite at zero with f(0) = 0, and has zero in its limiting subd-ifferential at zero. Relative to h0, f is relatively prox-regular at zero for the zero subgradient, and its least local modulus is r⋆ = 1, so λr⋆ 

= 1 exactly; no strict subcritical margin may be assumed. The map (z,y) to hz (y) is jointly C2 near (0,0); each 

hz extends to a supercoercive Legendre function; the y-curvatures have common positive local lower and upper bounds; h0(y) = y2/2; and affine normalization of hz is mathematically immaterial. The localized anchor problem f(y) + Dh0 (y, 0) has zero as its unique minimizer in [-ρ, ρ ], with zero in the interval’s interior. Scalar minimization over Iρ = [ − ρ, ρ ], positive kernel states a tending to zero, and centers represented by the affine-invariant tilt sa(x). The target is joint in state and center and is mathematically distinct from the established fixed-center endpoint rate. Only positive kernel states a tending to zero are considered. Center dependence is represented by sa(x) = ha‘(x)-

ha’(0). Uniform control through a Maxwell transition is measured by distance to the graph of the limiting argmin correspon-dence. Fiberwise control is asserted only when the compact pa-rameter is at distance at least ω(r) from the Maxwell set, where ω(r)/r β tends to ∞.Deterministic Maxwell branch selection is asserted only under BCG β .The target concerns all joint state-center paths, Maxwell switching, and branch realizability, not only s=0. The positive and refutation predicates explicitly define ev-ery sequence, set, estimate, limit, and failure alternative used in their verification. Assume QEG q,β . Prove the uniform value and argmin-graph estimates, the off-Maxwell fiber esti-mate, the BCG β detuned branch-selection and value-correction limits, and the two-well Maxwell classi-fication and exact branch-realization assertions stated in T ARGET QU AN T IT AT IV E,M AXW ELL,GRAP H . Every comparison object and quantified negation is defined below, so neither the positive nor refutation target relies on an omit-ted predicate. 

P093: A condition-corrected four-cycle constant Problem. For every admitted instance define t = λ/κ ; mem-bership in the class indexed by t requires λ/κ =t. For a fixed admitted instance I and ρ > 0, let R ρ(I; t, η ) be the supremum of r/q over its admissible updates with xk and 

xk+1 in the radius-ρ ball centered at ¯x. Define Q(I; t, η ) = 

limsup ρ↓0Rρ(I; t, η ), and define Q4,K ⋆(t, η ) = sup I

Q(I;t, η), where I ranges over fixed admitted instances with 

λ/κ =t and cond 2(DT( ¯x)) ≤K. Set a=1-η2. For B ∈B4,2D(K) and a unit vector h ∈R2 de-fine Φt,η (B, h )=∥h+(t/a)Bh ∥-( ηt/a) ∥Bh ∥.Define m4,2D(K,t, η)=inf{ Φt,η (B, h ): B∈B4,2D(K), 

∥h∥=1}. For an admitted instance put A=DT( ¯x) and B = κA. Instancewise differentiation of A3 gives smin (B) ≥1, while cond 2(B)=cond 2(A) ≤K. H is a real Hilbert space. T:H ⇒H is maximal monotone and S = T −1(0) is nonempty. There are a declared constant κ > 0 and a neighborhood U of a reference zero such that dist(x,S) ≤ κ dist(0,T(x)) for every x ∈U; κ is a certified bound defining the operator class and is not assumed to be the least possible modulus. The proximal parameter λ is a fixed positive scalar. Each tested update selects vk+1 ∈T( xk+1 ) and an arbi-trary error ek+1 satisfying xk − xk+1 = λv k+1 + ek+1 and 

∥ek+1 ∥≤ η∥xk − xk+1 ∥ for a fixed η∈[0,1). Every local one-step assertion is restricted to updates with 

xk+1 ∈U; no multi-step convergence assertion is authorized unless all graph points at which metric subregularity is used remain in U. All finite-dimensional real Hilbert spaces and fixed A1– A6 instances for which T is single-valued and continuously Fréchet differentiable near an isolated reference zero ¯x,A=DT( ¯x) is invertible with cond 2(A) ≤K, and the local graph is four-cyclically monotone. The localization limit is taken separately for each fixed instance before the supremum over instances. There is a neighborhood V ⊆U of an isolated reference zero ¯x on which T is single-valued and C 1, A=DT( ¯x) is invertible, and cond 2(A)= ∥A∥/smin (A) ≤K. For all x1,x 2,x 3,x 4∈V, with x5=x 1, one has Σ4

> i=1

⟨T( xi), x i − xi+1 ⟩≥ 0. Every instance entering Q4,K ⋆(t, η ) satisfies λ/κ =t, cond 2(DT( ¯x)) ≤K, and the declared η.For each fixed instance, take the limsup as the localization radius decreases to zero before taking the supremum over different operators and neighborhoods. For each fixed instance, the localized supremum uses A5 updates with xk and xk+1 in the shrinking ball, q=dist( xk,S) >0, and r=dist( xk+1 ,S) >0. Fix K ≥1, t>0, and η∈ (0 , 1) . For each fixed admitted finite-dimensional A1–A6 instance I, take its localized worst-case ratio Q(I;t, η) before taking the supremum Q 4,K*(t, η)over instances with λ/κ =t and cond 2(DT( ¯x)) ≤K. With m4,2D(K,t, η) defined by the planar derivative optimization below, the positive predicate is Q 4,K*(t, η)=1/m 4,2D(K,t, η)for every K ≥1, t>0, and η∈ (0 , 1) . Its logical refutation pred-icate is the existence of K ≥1, t>0, and η∈ (0 , 1) for which Q4,K ⋆(t, η )̸=1/m 4,2D(K,t, η). 

P094: A four-step dimension jump Problem. Let θ = (a, b, c) be the unique element of Θ and define hbdca = (b, 3/2, c, a). For an admissible instance I, generate x0 through x4 using 

hbdca and A3-A4, and set E4(I) = [f( x4)-f( x⋆ )]/(L D2). 

W4(hbdca ) = sup{ E4(I): I ranges over the full positive finite-dimensional instance domain}. 

W (1) 4 (hbdca ) = sup{ E4(I): I ranges over the dimension-one instance domain}. 

Pdim is the proposition W (1) 4 (hbdca ) ≤ 1/32 <W4(hbdca ). L>0 and D >0, and the ambient dimension d may be any positive finite integer. f: Rd → R is convex, differentiable, and L-smooth, attains its minimum at x⋆ , and the initial point satisfies ∥x0 − x⋆ ∥≤ D for at least one minimizer. For a horizon n, h = ( h0, . . . , hn−1) is any real scalar schedule fixed before observing gradients, and xt+1 = xt −

(ht/L) ∇ f( xt). Zero and negative entries are not excluded a priori. The method uses only the current gradient and the fixed scalar schedule: no momentum, memory variables, auxiliary sequences, line search, or adaptivity. For each h in Rn, W n(h) is the supremum of [f( xn)-f( x⋆ )]/(L D2) over the class in A1-A4 and all allowed finite dimensions, and Vn =∈ fh∈Rn Wn(h); neither the infimum nor any supremum is assumed to be attained. The problem concerns one exact algebraic four-step sched-ule. It compares the complete one-dimensional smooth-convex class with the unrestricted union of positive finite di-mensions. It does not ask for the exact value of W4(hbdca ), the global minimax value V4, a schedule atlas, or a permutation-orbit classification. The schedule is exactly hbdca = (b, 3/2, c, a) in this or-der. W (1) 4 ranges over every one-dimensional convex differ-entiable L-smooth objective satisfying A1-A4, not merely quadratics or clipped quadratics. W4 retains the A5 supre-mum over all positive finite dimensions. Both comparisons use the exact rational threshold 1/32. A rank-two attaining or feasible interpolation datum does not by itself prove a dimension gap. Under A1-A5, let (a, b, c) be the unique real triple in the stated isolating box satisfying a2 = 2 , b 2+a*b-2-2*a = 0, and c2 = 2*a+2*b+3, and fix hbdca = (b, 3/2, c, a). Let 

W (1) 4 (hbdca ) be the supremum defining W4(hbdca ) restricted to ambient dimension d = 1. Decide whether W (1) 4 (hbdca ) ≤

1/32 < W 4(hbdca ). 

P095: Polynomial arcs in three-state selection regions Problem. Set h(y)=y(y-1)(y-2), Li(y)=product over j in I with j different from i of (y-j)/(i-j), and f(x,y)=sum over i in I of ell i(x)Li(y). Then the feasible states are exactly I and 

f (x, i ) = ell i(x).

Ri={x: ell i(x) < ell j (x) for every j different from i}, and 

Ci is the closure of Ri.

Ti consists of w in R2 for which there exist xk in Ci and positive sk tending to zero such that xk tends to xbar and (xk-xbar)/ sk tends to w. 

DNi is the set of unit limits γ(t)/norm( γ(t)) as t decreases to zero, where γ(0) =xbar, both coordinates of γ are polyno-mials of degree at most N, γ(t) is nonzero, and γ(t) belongs to Ri for every sufficiently small positive t. For E contained in the unit circle, Rad(E)={0} union {r e:r >0 and e belongs to E}. The upper objective F and all lower-level objective and constraint data are twice continuously differentiable near the reference parameter and the finitely many reference lower solutions. At the reference parameter xbar, the lower problem has finitely many global optima and one or more specified asso-ciated KKT complementarity tuples at each optimum, and its feasible sets are uniformly level-bounded near xbar. This premise does not assert that the specified tuples exhaust all multiplier tuples. For every specified reference KKT tuple and every adja-cent complementarity face, the corresponding face-restricted KKT generalized equation is uniformly strongly regular on a specified neighborhood, with one common regularity modu-lus. Strict complementarity is not assumed. There are pairwise disjoint neighborhoods Ui of the refer-ence lower optima, a common compact localization K, and 

γ > 0 such that all nearby global lower minimizers lie in K and every nearby feasible y in K outside the union of the 

Ui has lower objective at least γ larger than the minimum lower objective attained over feasible points in that union. This premise does not assert KKT-tuple coverage or branch exhaustiveness. Let x=(u,v) range near xbar=(0,0) in R2 and let d be an integer at least two. The lower feasible set is {0,1,2}, repre-sented by h(y)=y(y-1)(y-2)=0. For i in I={0,1,2}, the lower trace ell i is a real polynomial of total degree at most d, 

ell 0(0) = ell 1(0) = ell 2(0), and every pairwise difference 

ell i − ell j is nonzero. The lower objective is the Lagrange interpolation polynomial f(x,y)=sum over i of ell i(x)Li(y), where Li(j) equals one if i=j and zero otherwise. The upper objective is identically zero. This fixed system satisfies A1-A4. Only exact polynomial access to lower-selection regions is tested; generalized-gradient identities already established in the quartic special case are not restated. The parameter space is R2, the lower feasible set is exactly {0,1,2}, and the three lower traces have total degree at most the variable integer d ≥2. All three lower traces agree at the origin, and ell i − ell j is a nonzero polynomial for every distinct i and j. An accessing arc must be polynomial in its scalar parame-ter, remain in the strict selection region for every sufficiently small positive parameter, and have each coordinate of degree at most d2.For planar polynomial lower traces of arbitrary degree d, determine whether every tangent direction of every incident strict three-state selection region is approximable by direc-tions of exact polynomial arcs of coordinate degree at most 

d2. The fixed three-state equality-constrained lower problem makes branch exhaustiveness automatic, so the only unre-solved issue is the effective geometry of two simultaneous polynomial inequalities. 

P096: First variation of exit risk under observation error Problem. For η≥0, F( η) is the supremum of Px0(τD ≤T) over the nonanticipative error sequences authorized by A4 with norm at most η at every update. 

ηgeom =(1/4)min{ wcol ,r0, ρD }, with the quantities speci-fied in SC4. For 0 < η< η geom , R(η)=(F( η)−F(0))/ η.For Borel B ⊂D, P( Xk∆ ∈B, τD > k∆)= R B pk(x)dx under exact observations. 

Qk(x, a ) is the probability of exit by T when Xk∆=x, action a is held on [k ∆,(k+1) ∆), and exact observations are used at all later updates. 

L = 

> N−1

X

> k=1

Z

> Sreg

pk(z)

· Qk(z, a +(z)) − Qk(z, a −(z)) 

dHd−1(z).ηc=sup{ η≥0:F( η)≤ α}, with values in [0, ∞]; endpoint safety is the separate predicate ηc < ∞ and F( ηc) ≤ α.D is a bounded C3 domain with positive reach and bounded principal curvatures; x0 is a fixed point of D with recorded clearance δ0=dist(x0, ∂D) >0. U is compact; b and Σ are bounded and uniformly Lips-chitz in the state on a neighborhood of the closure of D, uni-formly over u; and every progressively measurable U-valued control gives a unique strong solution up to τD .Bounded continuous running cost ℓ, terminal cost g, and exit cost q define the fixed H-horizon stopped exit-cost prob-lem. It is stipulated, rather than inferred from the preceding regularity, that this problem admits a Borel time-zero mini-mizing selector μH on D. A deterministic tie-breaking rule and a fixed boundary action extend μH to the closure of D; measurability is not interpreted as continuity or robustness. On the filtered probability space carrying W, let Ek be measurable with respect to the completed pre-decision his-tory generated by X0, W up to k ∆, and E0 through Ek−1,with norm( Ek) ≤η. Set Yk = Xk∆ + Ek. Let ΠD be a fixed Borel nearest-point selector onto the closure of D, equal to the unique metric projection in the reach tube and using de-terministic tie-breaking elsewhere. The implemented control is ut = μH (Π D (Yk)) for t in [k ∆,(k+1) ∆)∩[0,T] until exit, followed by a fixed cemetery action. For exact observations Ek=0, the same zero-order-held controller satisfies the pointwise certificate Px0(τD ≤T) ≤

α-s for fixed T, α in (0,1), and s >0. No uniform certificate over other initial or reachable replanning states is assumed. The parameters ε ≥0 and 0 < ∆≤H≤T are explicit, and the boundary-normal covariance n(x) T Σ( x)Σ( x)T n(x) is re-tained as a local quantity; degenerate normal diffusion re-mains in scope. One fixed stopped diffusion and zero-order-held controller satisfying A1–A6 is considered. The horizon is T=N ∆ with fixed finite N ≥2, and the effective covariance εΣΣ T is uni-formly elliptic. The selector is piecewise constant across finitely many compact C 2 interior hypersurfaces, agrees on each regular interface with one of its two adjacent traces, is constant in a boundary collar, and has only an exceptional junction set whose η-neighborhood has volume o( η). The initial state is separated from the switching set. F remains de-fined for every η≥0, while the right asymptotic is restricted to 0 < η< η geom .T=N ∆ for a fixed integer N ≥2, and the same selector is sampled at k ∆ for k=0,. . . ,N −1. For every action used by μH , b( ·,a) and Σ are C1,β 

on a neighborhood of the closure of D, and λef f I≤

εΣ( x)Σ( x)T ≤ Λef f I for fixed 0 < λ ef f ≤ Λef f .There are finitely many Borel action cells with pairwise disjoint interiors whose union is the closure of D. Their entire interior switching set is Sreg ∪J, where Sreg is a finite union of compact C 2 hypersurface pieces, every point of Sreg has exactly two adjacent open cells, μH on Sreg equals one of the two adjacent action traces, and the exceptional compact set J satisfies Leb({x ∈D:dist(x,J) ≤r})=o(r) as r ↓0. Record wcol >0 such that μH is constant on {x ∈D:dist(x, ∂D) < wcol }; set r0=dist(x0, Sreg ∪J) >0, let 

ρD be the reach supplied by A1, and define 

ηgeom =(1/4)min{ wcol ,r0, ρD }. For the effectively uniformly elliptic finite-update sub-class of A1–A6 whose selector has a geometrically tame fi-nite action partition, determine whether F( η)=F(0)+L η+o( η)as η↓0. The coefficient L sums, over positive replanning times and regular switching interfaces, the nominal killed-state density times the absolute jump in conditional exit risk caused by forcing either adjacent action for the next holding interval. 

P097: Attainment of the Maxwell distortion threshold Problem. Set εk = 2 (−k), x k = εk, h(t)=t log t, f(t)=-h(t)/2, and λ=1. For differentiable g, Dg (y, x )=g(y)-g(x)-g’(x)(y-x). For a profile A, let gA be any twice differentiable function with gA’ ’(s)=A(s)/s; its affine normalization is immaterial. 

Lip log (A) is the least β such that | log A(s)-log A(t) |≤ β |

log s-log t | for all s,t in L. 

Γ( A) is the infimum over s in I, s not equal to 1, of the minimum of DgA (s, 1) /D h(s, 1) and DgA (1 , s )/D h(1 , s ).

P si A,p (s) = gA(s)-h(s)/2-ps on J. A profile is Maxwell-feasible when it satis-fies SC EXACT,SU P P ORT,P ROF ILE , Γ( A) ≥13/20, and there exist p, u, and v satisfying 

SC SEP ARAT ED,M AXW ELL,P AIR with P si A,p (u) =

P si A,p (v) = min s∈J P si A,p (s).

β⋆ is the infimum of Lip log (A) over all Maxwell-feasible profiles A, with β⋆ = ∞ if none exists. Set hk’‘( εk s)=A(s)/( εk s) on εk L, set hk’‘(t)=1/t outside that layer, and match h and h’ on the left exterior component. Endpoint matching and the two moment conditions give a globally C2 Legendre kernel equal to h on both exterior components. The ambient space is finite-dimensional, and h and every 

hk are Legendre functions with the same nonempty open convex interior domain Ω.Each kernel is twice continuously differentiable and has positive-definite Hessian on Ω, while hk converges to h in C1 on every fixed compact subset of Ω; no uniform Hessian or divergence comparison is assumed near the boundary. The objective f is fixed, proper, lower-semicontinuous, and prox-bounded relative to the reference kernel h. There are attentive graph points ( xk, v k) with vk in the lim-iting subdifferential of f at xk, x k approaching the boundary of Ω, shrinking neighborhoods Uk, and a constant r such that f(z) is at least f(x)+ < v,z-x > −rD h(z, x ) for every suf-ficiently large k and every authorized attentive graph point (x,v) and z in Uk.The proximal parameter λ is fixed and positive with λ r<1, and all localized subproblems under consideration remain inside Ω.Use exactly A1-A5 in dimension one with Ω = (0 , ∞), h(t)=t log t, λ=1, f=-h/2, εk = 2 (−k), and xk = εk. Generate 

hk from one positive continuous normalized curvature profile A on L=[1/4,2] satisfying endpoint matching and both exact-support moments. Require Γ( A) ≥13/20 on I=[1/2,3/2] and two global minimizers in J0=[49/64,55/64] separated by at least 1/32. Minimize Lip log (A) over these profiles. Set h(t)=t log t, f(t)=-h(t)/2, λ = 1 , ε k = 2 (−k), and xk =

εk.The profile A is positive and continuous on L, satisfies A(1/4)=A(2)=1, ∈ tL(A − 1) ds=0, and ∈ tL(A − 1) ds/s=0. The bidirectional anchored divergence functional Γ( A) is at least 13/20. The two global minimizers u and v lie in J0=[49/64,55/64] and satisfy v-u ≥1/32. Determine whether the minimum log-coordinate distor-tion needed for an exact-support boundary layer to create a separated Maxwell pair under a strict bidirectional anchored divergence margin is finite and attained. 

P098: The nine-round delay threshold Problem. Set Xk = xk 

> 1

+ xk 

> 2

, U k = xk 

> 1

− xk 

> 2

, Y k = yk 

> 1

+ yk 

> 2

,and Vk = yk 

> 1

−yk 

> 2

, with all negative-index sender states equal to zero. Define q+(λ) = 2lambda 10 − λ9 − 1, q −(λ) =2lambda 10 − λ9 + 1 , F +(λ, α ) = q+(λ)2+4alpha λ18 (λ-1), and F−(λ, α ) = q−(λ)2+4alpha λ18 (λ-1). The fixed opti-mizer mode λ=1 is removed from F+ when testing stability. For θ in Dphase set u( θ)=2cos( θ)-1+cos(9theta), v( θ)=2sin( θ)-sin(9theta), and g( θ)=2u( θ)v( θ)(cos( θ)-1)-(u (θ)2-v (θ)2)sin( θ). Define θ9 as the unique zero of g in Dphase for which -[u( θ)+i v( θ)] 2/[4(exp(i θ)-1)] is positive real. 

α9=[u (θ9)2+v (θ9)2]/[8sin( θ9/2)], numerically about 0.1095702253. 

Ek = P 

> i

| xki -x ⋆ | 2 + P 

> i

| yki | 2+ | P 

> i

yki −P 

> i

∇fi(xki ) | 2, where x ⋆ = ( b1 + b2)/2. Fix integers n at least 2, d at least 1, H at least 1, and B at least 0; real constants 0 < μ ≤ L, 0 < a ≤ 1/2, and 0 < q ≤ 1. Each deterministic fi on Rd is differentiable, L-smooth, and 

μ-strongly convex, and f = (1 /n )sum ifi has the unique minimizer x⋆ .At round k, Ak = ( akij ) is row-stochastic and Ck = ( ckij )is column-stochastic, where entry (i,j) multiplies information sent from j to i. Define the active graph Gk so that, for i not equal to j, arc j →i is present exactly when both akij and ckij 

are positive. Thus the two operators have identical positive off-diagonal supports. Every diagonal and every positive off-diagonal entry of either operator is at least a. The union of every H consecutive active graphs is strongly connected. The operators may have different weights and need not be doubly stochastic. For each active cross-arc j →i at round k, sender j forms 

dij , x k=Q( xkj − sij , x k) and dij , y k=Q( ykj − sij , y k), imme-diately adds these increments to its corresponding sender memories, and enqueues one timestamped pair. Every en-queued message is delivered exactly once after an integer delay in [0,B], independently of whether its link remains active, through a per-link FIFO channel. At each round, mes-sages are formed first; all messages due that round are then delivered in timestamp order and added to the receiver mem-ories before the state update. A duplicate or timestamp no newer than the last accepted timestamp is ignored. There are no losses, and sender memories on inactive links remain unchanged. One fixed deterministic compressor Q with Q(0)=0 is used throughout a run. Its intrinsic quality is qQ=1-sup over nonzero v of ∥Q(v)-v ∥2/∥v∥2, and admissibility requires qQ

in [q,1]. Quality is determined by this realized supremum rather than by a declared nonsharp label. Choose arbitrary initial x0 

> i

, set y0 

> i

= ∇fi(x0 

> i

), and ini-tialize every cross-link sender and receiver reconstruction to zero, every last accepted timestamp to -1, and every queue to empty. For a constant α in (0,1/L], after round-k deliveries set rii , x k = xki and rii , y k = yki , then update 

xk+1  

> i

= P 

> j

akij rij , x k − αy ki and yk+1  

> i

= P 

> j

ckij rij , y k +

∇fi(xk+1  

> i

) − ∇ fi(xki ). For fixed n and B the stored state is finite-dimensional; no bounded-trajectory premise is im-posed. Fix n=2, d=1, L = μ=1, H=1, B=9, a=1/2, and q=1. These constraints force Ak = Ck = J = (1 /2)11 T and Q(v)=v. Every cross-link message is assigned delay exactly nine. Quantify over all objectives fi(x) = ( x − bi)2/2 + ci, all initial primal states, and the initialization prescribed by A5. Every cross-link message formed at round k is delivered at round k+9. Set n=2, H=1, a=1/2, and q=1. The target identifies the endpoint of the connected con-vergence interval issuing from α=0 and makes no claim that instability persists at every larger stepsize. In the two-agent scalar complete-averaging identity-compressed cell with every cross-link message delayed ex-actly nine rounds, prove or refute that the first loss of uniform exact convergence occurs at the explicit disagreement-mode value α9 defined below. 

P099: The sum problem in bidual defect one Problem. JX (x) is the element of X** defined by 

JX (x)(x ⋆) = < x, x ⋆ > .(A+B)(y) = {astar+bstar: astar in A(y), bstar in B(y)}. gra(A+B) = {(y, astar+bstar): y in X, astar in A(y), bstar in B(y)}. (x, xstar) is monotonically related to gra(A+B) when <

x-y, xstar-astar-bstar > ≥ 0 for every y in X, astar in A(y), and bstar in B(y). X is a real Banach space and its canonical image JX (X)

has codimension one in X , i.e. dim(X /JX (X)) = 1. A and B are maximal monotone operators from X to sub-sets of X⋆ .dom(A) intersect int(dom(B)) is nonempty. Universal over real Banach spaces whose canonical im-age has codimension one in the bidual and over all maximal monotone pairs satisfying the stated interior-domain con-dition; no full-domain, subdifferential, normal-cone, repre-sentability, or type assumption is added. The interior in A3 is the norm interior in X, and all duality pairings are the canonical pairings. A and B range over all maximal monotone operators allowed by A2 rather than only source-listed special classes. A refutation must exhibit a point monotonically related to gra(A+B) but not in gra(A+B), not merely a failure of a proposed proof route. Let X be a real Banach space with dim(X ⋆ ∗ /J X (X))= 1. Let A, B:X → 2(X⋆ ) be maximal monotone and sup-pose dom(A) intersect int(dom(B)) is nonempty. Determine whether A+B is maximal monotone. 

P100: The directed-cycle penalty Problem. Let D = diag(1 , 2, 1) and z⋆ = 0 . A tracker-consistent initial state satisfies y0 = Dx 0. For the trajectory generated by I and α > 0, define 

Eαk =  ∥xk∥22 + α2∥yk∥22

1/2 ,

Rk(I, α ) = sup  

> x0∈R3, y 0=Dx 0
> Eα
> 0>0

Eαk

Eα

> 0

.

Set S(I) = {α > 0 : sup 

> k≥0

Rk(I, α ) < ∞,

lim  

> k→∞

Rk(I, α ) = 0 }.

Also set 

T1/4(I, α ) = inf 



K ∈ N0 : sup 

> k≥K

Rk(I, α ) ≤ 14



,NCYCLE (η) = sup 

> I∈D CYCLE (η)

inf  

> α∈S(I)

T1/4(I, α ).

The last two quantities equal +∞ when their defining set is empty. For I ∈ D CYCLE (η), let 

Mj (α) = 

 Aj −αI 3

D(Aj − I3) Bj − αD 



.

The period matrix is 

PI (α) = M1(α)M0(α).

The permitted initial states are ( x0, Dx 0), and their period-boundary reachable space is the smallest PI (α)-invariant subspace containing all such states. There are n ≥3 agents with scalar objectives fi(z) =

hi(z −ri)2/2, where 1 ≤ hi ≤2. Their average has the unique minimizer z⋆ , and ∇ F(x)=( hi(xi − ri)) ni=1 .For a constant α > 0, the algorithm is xk+1 = Akxk −αy k

and yk+1 = Bkyk + ∇ F( xk+1 ) − ∇ F( xk), with tracker-consistent initialization y0 = ∇ F( x0). Each Ak is row-stochastic and each Bk is column-stochastic. Both have positive diagonal entries, and for i ̸=j, 

(Ak)ij >0 if and only if (Bk)ij >0 if and only if the directed edge j →i is present at time k. Every positive entry of either matrix is at least η, where 0 < η ≤1/2. For a fixed integer H ≥1, the union of the directed graphs in every H consecutive times is strongly connected. An admissible instance I consists of the objective data and matrix schedule satisfying A1-A4, but not an initial-ization. For each I and α, E αk , Rk, T ε, S(I), and NGT are defined as in the claim shape, with Rk taking the supre-mum over all tracker-consistent x0 having Eα 

> 0

>0 and NGT 

taking the supremum over all admissible instances. An in-stance with S(I) empty makes NGT infinite. No finiteness or heterogeneity-control property of the chosen normalization is assumed. All two-periodic row-stochastic and column-stochastic matrix pairs satisfying A1-A5 with h=(1,2,1), r=(0,0,0), and the exact phase supports. Every active edge weight and com-plementary diagonal entry is at least η, and the stepsize is optimized over the explicitly defined set S(I). At even times the only off-diagonal edge is 1 →2; at odd times the only off-diagonal edges are 2 →3 and 3 →1. The matrix sequence repeats with period two. Fix h=(1,2,1) and r=(0,0,0), so z⋆ =0 and tracker-consistent initialization is y0=diag (1 , 2, 1) x0.For each matrix instance, minimize T1/4(I, α) over every 

α in S(I), using only tracker-consistent initial states. Fix n = 3 , H = 2 , D = diag(1 , 2, 1) , and r = (0 , 0, 0) ,with two-periodic supports 

E0 = {1 → 2}, E1 = {2 → 3, 3 → 1}.

Determine whether there exist η0 ∈ (0 , 1/2] and constants 

0 < c lower ≤ cupper < ∞ such that 

clower η−1 ≤ NCYCLE (η) ≤ cupper η−1 (0 < η ≤ η0).