Title: 2604.03504v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03504v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:15:39 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
Amalgamation of Physics -Informed Neural Network and LBM for the Prediction of Unsteady 

Fluid Flow s in Fractal -Rough Microchannels 

Ganesh Sahadeo Meshram 1, Partha Pratim Chakrabarti 2, Suman Chakraborty 1* 

> 1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, I ndian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 

721302, India 

> 2

Depart ment of Computer Science & Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 

Kharagpur, 721302, India 

Corresponding Author:  suman@mech.iitkgp.ac.in 

Abstract 

One of the biggest challenges in the optimiza tion of micro -scale fluid transport phenomena is the 

prediction of unsteady fluid flow in the presence of rough channel walls. Even though the accuracy 

of available computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solvers such as the lattice Boltzmann method 

(LBM) is sa tisfactory, the computational cost of design exploration is very high due to the diverse 

range of geometries and flow regimes involved in microchannel flows. The present paper introduces 

a revolutionary concept of a ground -breaking physics -informed neural network (PINN) that utilizes 

sparse lattice Boltzmann data in combination with the Navier -Stokes equations for the prediction of 

unsteady fluid flow in fractal -rough microchannels. The roughness of the channel walls is represented 

by the Weierstrass -Mandel brot function, considering the characteristics of the surface roughness in 

real -life problems. The constraints of the Navier -Stokes equations are incorporated in the loss 

function of the PINN concept for achieving accuracy at much lower computational costs of 150 -200 

times fewer data points. The validation of the accuracy of the reconstruction of the flow fields is 

carried out for different Reynolds numbers ranging from Re = 1 to 45 and different amplitude values 

of the rough channel walls ranging from 5 to 20 lattice units. The accuracy of the reconstruction of 

the flow fields is found to be very high, with average absolute errors less than 8 × 10⁻³ lattice units in 

velocity fields, relative L2 errors less than 3.2%, and continuity residual values less than 4 × 10⁻⁵ 

lattice units per lattice unit. The physics -informed framework is also capable of reproducing the 

phenomenon of nonlinear vorticity intensification due to the increase in amplitude of the roughness 

from 3.8 × 10⁻³ to 1.21 × 10⁻² lattice units per lattice unit. Moreover, the accuracy of the global 

conservation of the physics -informed framework is within 4%. The accuracy of the PINN -based 

approach can also be confirmed by comparing the results with those of the CNN -based approach. The 

accuracy of th e PINN -based approach is 5 -15 times higher than that of the CNN -based approach in 

terms of mean squared error, root mean squared error, and mean absolute error due to the imposition 

of the physics -informed constraints. The PINN -based approach is also more efficient in terms of inference of flow fields since the inference of flow fields by the PINN -based approach only takes 8.3 

seconds compared to the direct LBM -based approach, which takes 147 hours. Thus, the PINN -based 

approach is 1062 times more efficient . The accuracy of the PINN -based approach can also be 

confirmed by comparing the results of the PINN -based approach with those of the direct LBM -based 

approach in the quantification of uncertainties over 500 different surface realizations. The PINN -

based a pproach can perform the quantification of uncertainties in 3.1 days compared to the 8.4 years 

required by the direct LBM -based approach. 

Keywords: Physics -informed neural networks (PINNs); lattice Boltzmann method (LBM); fractal 

rough microchannels; Weiers trass –Mandelbrot function; fluid flow .

1. Introduction 

The micro -scale transport of fluids in confined channels has emerged as one of the most important 

branches of modern thermal fluid engineering [1], [2] . This branch of science and engineering 

underpins many important technologies, including lab -on -a-chip diagnostic devices, micro -

electromechanical systems, electrokinetic separation techniques, thermal management in 

microprocessors, and drug delivery systems, among others [3], [4], [5] . Although continuum -based 

theories have been successful in explaining laminar flows in smooth channels, in practice, 

microchannel surfaces often display multi -scale roughness artifacts [6] . These arise duri ng fabrication 

techniques, which include photolithography, reactive ion etching, laser ablation, and three -

dimensional printing, among others [7] . Unlike macroscale flows, in which the effects of surface 

roughness can often be treated as perturbations to the bulk behavior, micro -scale flows display a high 

sensitivity to surface roughness, especia lly when the roughness height, h, approaches or exceeds 5 to 

10 percent of the hydraulic diameter, Dh [6], [8], [9], [10], [11] . In these cases, even steady -state inlet 

flow can induce unsteady effects, including boundary -layer separation, localized vortex shedding, 

and recirculating zones, which significantly impact pressure drop, friction factor, and convective heat 

transfer [12], [13] . The simulation of these spatiotemporal effects with reasonable accuracy for design 

optimization purposes requires numerical simulations that can resolve mic ro -scale surface features, 

which can be in the range of nanometers to micrometers. This poses a challenge to conventional 

computational fluid dynamics solvers, which can be computationally intensive and complex to mesh 

[14] .

However, classical CFD methods based on finite volume and/or finite element discretization schemes 

have faced considerable challenges when extended to analyze microchannel flows over rough walls 

[8], [15] . The body -fitted meshing of complex microchannel geometries and topologies requires 

adaptive mesh refinement strategies that lead to an exponential increa se in the number of grid points, especially in the vicinity of high -curvature wall asperities where strong velocity and pressure gradient 

fields are expected [16] . While wall function models and equivalent sand grain roughness correlations 

have been developed f or turbulent flow over rough walls, the applicability of these models for 

microscale and/or transitional flow is debatable, especially in cases where wall roughness leads to 

flow separation and invalidates the logarithmic law of the wall assumption [12], [17], [18], [19] . The 

Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM), a relatively new and promising computational fluid dynamics tool 

for simulating complex microscale and mesoscale fluid dynamics problems, has gained considerable 

attention for modeling complex microchannel geometrie s and topologies [20], [21] . The method is 

based on a kinetic theory of fluids and naturally handles complex geometries and topologies by 

performing simple local collision and streaming operations without explicit discretization of the 

Navier -Stokes equations. The ap plicability of LBM for modeling transitional flow over structured, 

stochastic, and fractal rough microchannel surfaces has been recently demonstrated by several 

investigators [22], [23], [24], [25] . The studies have shown that microscale flow over multiscale 

micro -asp erities leads to an enhancement of near -wall vorticity by up to 300% and phase -locked 

pressure fluctuations [26] . While these studies have provided important insights into microscale flow 

over complex microchannel geometries and topologies, parametric studies o f Reynolds number (Re), 

roughness height (h), fractal dimension (D), and unsteady boundary conditions using LBM are 

prohibitively expensive due to the high computational cost of a single unsteady simulation [18] .

One of the main difficulties in the modeling of rough microchannel flow is the accurate mathematical 

representation of the surface morphology [16] . Experimental atomic force microscopy and white -

light interferometry measurements on various engineer ing surfaces show the presence of self -affine 

fractals, as opposed to the random Gaussian distribution [27] . Their power spectral density functions 

exhibit power -law behavior over 2 to 3 decades of spatial frequency. Of the many possible 

mathematical models, th e Weierstrass –Mandelbrot function has been shown to be extremely effective 

in producing realistic surface roughness using the superposition of fractals with different scaling 

exponents [28] . The W –M function is given by the equation, where the parameters As, γ, and D 

represent the surface roughness amplitude, surface roughness frequency scaling parameter, and fractal 

dimension, respectively. Using this functi on, the effect of the different surface morphology 

parameters on the flow resistance and mixing efficiency can be systematically studied. Previous 

studies using the W –M function in the LBM algorithm show the effect of the fractal dimension on 

the vorticity generated using W –M surfaces. Increasing the fractal dimension from 1.2 to 1.8 increases 

the vorticity by 250%, and the friction factors increase by 40 to 60 percent compared to smooth 

surfaces [29], [30] . However, the non -lin ear relationship between the fractals, Reynolds number, and 

flow transient response is complex. The recent introduction of Physics -Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) has sparked a revolution in 

scientific machine learning [31], [32], [33], [34] . Physics -informed neural networks di rectly 

incorporate partial differential equations into loss functions and thus constrain solution manifolds 

onto physically valid state spaces. Unlike data -driven surrogates, PINNs do not require extensive data 

sets for training purposes; rather, they use automatic differentiation techniques to compute PDE 

residuals at arbitrarily selected collocation points [34], [35], [36] . This approach ensures the 

satisfaction of conservation laws such as continuity, momentum, and energy conservation in regions 

without data availability . Raissi et al. [37], [38], [39] pioneering work in 2019 showed PINN’s 

potential in solving forward and inverse problems related to the Navier -Stokes equations. Subsequent 

contributions have included improvements in PINN algorithms, including adaptive loss weighting 

sche mes and causal learning techniques [40] . These improvements have enabled PINN’s application 

in solving problems related to turbulent flows, multiphase flows, and non -Newtonian fluids [41] .

PINNs have shown considerable promise in solving problems related to microflu idics, including 

reconstructing steady -state Poiseuille Couette flows [42] determining thermal boundary conditions 

[43] and determining constitutive parameters in viscoelastic fluids [44] . However, existing PINN 

architectures have mostly focused on problems related to smooth geometries characterized by 

sinusoidal corrugations and one -wavelength perturbations. These architectures rarely focus on 

problems related to time -dependent flows in stochastic fractal geometr ies characterized by steep 

gradients and significant recirculation regions. These regions make it difficult to minimize residuals 

during PINN training. Moreover, the use of level set techniques in modeling irregular boundary 

physics results in numerical in accuracies in regions near the walls characterized by no -slip boundary 

conditions. 

Notwithstanding the recent surge in interest in hybrid physics data learning approaches, considerable 

research gaps still exist in the application of PINNs to the simulation of rough -wall microscale flow. 

First, the overwhelming majority of existing work relies on the incorporation of smooth -wall CFD 

data or employs overly simplistic models of surface roughness, such as the single Fourier mode. 

Second, the extension to fractal geometric parameters such as the Hurst exponent, fractal dimension, 

and spectral amplitude as additional inputs to the PINN is unexplored. Third, the simulation of 

unsteady vortical structures caused by flow separation behind asperity -scale roughness features is 

problematic for PINN training because of the high spatial and temporal gradients in the flow field, 

which can cause loss function ruggedness and convergence difficulties. Fourth, comparative studies 

to evaluate the accuracy, eff iciency, and data demand of the PINN -based model with other solvers 

and black -box neural networks are noticeably absent. These gaps underscore the urgent need to 

develop a unified framework to synergistically integrate fractal surface modeling, mesoscopic lattice Boltzmann data generation, and physics -constrained neural learning to rapidly, accurately, and 

generally predict unsteady rough channel flow. 

The current work aims to fill these significant research gaps through the development of a novel 

hybrid PI NN -LBM framework, where incompressible Navier –Stokes equations, continuity 

equations, and no -slip boundary conditions are directly integrated into the loss function of a neural 

network. The proposed framework is trained using sparse spatiotemporal data fro m high -fidelity 

simulations of fractal -rough microchannels using lattice Boltzmann methods. The Weierstrass 

Mandelbrot function is used to generate statistically controlled multiscale surface textures with 

varying fractal dimensions D ∈ [1.3, 1.7], surface roughness amplitude h ∈ [5, 20] lattice units, and 

a frequency scaling factor γ = 1.5, which covers a wide range of realistic surface textures encountered 

in engineering applications. The current work presents a systematic investigati on of unsteady flow 

development over a wide range of Reynolds numbers Re = 10 -45, which covers laminar and weakly 

transitional flows. The PINN successfully predicts velocity fields (u, v), pressure, and vorticity with 

a high level of accuracy, where relati ve errors are below 2 * 10⁻², mean absolute errors are below 1 * 

10⁻³, and total loss converges below 10⁻⁷. Exhaustive benchmarking of the PINN's performance using 

traditional CNNs indicates a 43 –51% reduction in mean squared error, 62% faster training 

con vergence, 68% reduction in inference latency, and 54% reduction in parameters while using 

PINNs, which demonstrates its superior accuracy, efficiency, and data economy. The analysis reveals 

the non -linear scaling of vorticity near the wall in terms of the amplitude of the roughness. The 

maximum vorticity, ωmax, varies from 4 × 10⁻³ to 1.5 × 10⁻² for h ranging from 5 to 20 lu. The work 

also explores the dependence on the Reynolds number. The framework reveals its generalization 

capabilities by correctly pred icting unseen flow roughness arrangements and intermediate Reynolds 

numbers without retraining. The framework has the potential to act as a digital twin surrogate for 

microfluidic design optimization in real -time. 

The rest of this document is organized in the following manner. Section 2 explains the formulation 

of the problem, the generation of the Weierstrass -Mandelbrot surfaces, the LBM numerical 

implementation, and the PINN architecture along with the loss function formulation. Section 3 

explains the val idation of the framework by comparing it with the LBM for different Re, h, and time 

evolution. Section 4 explains the flow physics analysis, such as vorticity, velocity profile, and flow 

modulation due to the introduction of the roughness. Section 5 explai ns the scientific implications of 

the work, future extensions of the work, and the conclusions. 

2. Methodology 

2.1 Problem definition and physical model Figure 1. Problem definition a) rough microchannel with boundary conditions, b) roughness profile. 

With rough solid walls on both the top and bottom boundaries, the computational domain is a two -

dimensional microchannel with length L and average height H. The Weierstrass -Mandelbrot (W -M) 

function is used to deterministically gener ate the roughness profiles, which are regarded as inflexible, 

impermeable boundaries. The problem geometry and boundary conditions uniform inlet velocity at x 

= 0, a pressure outlet at x = L, and no -slip (bounce -back) conditions imposed on the rough walls are 

depicted in Figure 1. The coordinate system uses y for the wall -normal direction and x for the 

streamwise direction. y = H/2 is the channel midline. 

The wall topography is represented by the W –M function ( )       

> max 0
> (1)
> ( ) cos 2
> nn D nsnnn
> y x Ax

   

> −−=
> =+

# 

(1)

where sA is the spectral amplitude controlling the overall roughness height,  is the frequency -scaling 

parame ter, D is the fractal dimension (with 1 2D  for self -affine profiles), and n

 denotes a random 

phase for each mode. The summation limits, 0n and max n , determine the l argest and smallest resolved 

wavelengths, respectively, and are chosen to ensure the generated profile contains the range of spatial 

scales relevant to the flow simulations. From the generated profile we define the mean roughness 

height avg h , the maximum peak height max h , and the minimum trough depth min h as illustrated in 

Figure 1(b). 

The fluid is assumed Newtonian and incompressible. At the continuum level the flow satisfies the 

incompressible Navier –Stokes equations 0 =u

(2)2

> pt

 +   = − +      

> uuuu

(3)

where ( , ) u v =u denotes the velocity vector, p is the hydrodynamic pressure, rho is the fluid density, 

and mu is the dynamic viscosity. In the numeri cal experiments reported in this work we explore 

laminar and weakly transitional regimes with characteristic Reynolds numbers defined as Re ,iU H 

=

where iU is the prescribed inlet velocity and    = is the kinematic viscosity. 

High -fidelity reference data for network training and validation are generated using the Lattice 

Boltzmann Method (LBM). In the LBM simulations the rough walls are imposed via bounce -back 

boundary conditions on the solid no des that represent the discretized topography; this mesoscopic 

treatment reproduces the no -slip constraint at the fluid –solid interface without requiring body -fitted 

meshes. The inlet uses a uniform velocity profile while the outlet is implemented as a fix ed -pressure 

boundary. Spatiotemporal snapshots of the macroscopic fields (velocity components and pressure) 

are recorded at regular intervals to construct the dataset used for PINN training and testing. 

All quantities reported in this study are presented i n lattice or non -dimensional form unless otherwise 

stated. The range of geometric and flow parameters considered in the results includes Re = 10 -45 and 

roughness amplitudes h = 5 -20 lattice units (lu), which collectively sample regimes where near -wall 

geom etry significantly modifies the laminar flow structure. 

2.2 Mathematical Formulation 

The following mathematical formulation establishes the governing relations used in both the high -

fidelity LBM simulations and the PINN. The incompressible Navier –Stokes equations serve as the 

continuum model for momentum and mass conservation. The differential form of these equations is 

expressed as :

Continuity 0 =u

(4)

Momentum 2

> pt

 +   = − +  +      

> uuuuf

(5)

where ( , , ) ( , ) x y t u v =u de notes the velocity vector, p(x,y,t) is the pressure field, rho the fluid density, 

mu the dynamic viscosity, and f any external body force (set to zero in the present study). Equations 

4 and 5 are enforced throughout the fluid region bounded by the rough wa lls illustrated in  Figure 1.To ensure numerical stability and to render results independent of dimensional units, all variables are 

non -dimensionalized using the channel height H and inlet velocity Ui as characteristic scales [45] .

Th e non -dimensional variables are , , ,itU x yx y tH H H

= = =2

, 

> ii

ppU U

= =

uu . Substitution 

into Eq. 5 yields the dimensionless momentum equation 21Re 

pt

 +   = − + 

u u u u

(6)

where the Reynolds number Re iU H 

= with  = .

Boundary conditions for the continuum problem are specified as follows. 

Inlet velocity ( 0, , ) (1,0) x y t = =u

(7)

Outlet pressure 0( , , ) p x L y t p= =

(8)

No -slip condition at rough walls ( , ( ), ) (0,0) wx y y x t= =u

(9)

Where ( ) wy x denotes the non -dimensional wall , profile prescribed by the W –M function and 0p is 

the specified outlet pressure. In the LBM implementation, the no -slip condition is enforced through 

bounce -back boundary treatment applied to lattice nodes that represent solid regi ons. 

For completeness, the lattice Boltzmann equation employed to generate the training data is 

summarized below. The discrete -velocity evolution equation for the particle distribution function ( , ) if tx

on a D2Q9 velocity set is given by 1( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) eq i i i i if t t t f t f t f t

 +  +  − = − − x c x x x

(10 )

where ic are the discrete lattice velocities,  is the relaxati on time related to the kinematic viscosity 

by 2 12

> s

c t

  = −    , and eq if is the local equilibrium distribution. Macroscopic density and momentum 

are recovered through moments of fi as ,i i ii i 

> ff

= = u c

(11 )The equilibrium distribution eq 

> i

f employed in the simulations follows the standard second -order 

Hermite expansion of the Maxwel l–Boltzmann distribution, which is valid for low Mach number 

flows [25] . For the D2Q9 lattice employed in this study, the equilibrium distribution function takes 

the form: 22 4 2

( )1 2 2     

> eq iiiisss

f w c c c

   = + + −  

c u c u u u 

(12 )

where wi are the lattice weights and cs is the lattice speed of sound. For the D2Q9 stencil the standard 

lattice weights are 0 1..4 5..8 

4 1 1, ,9 9 36 

w w w= = =

(13 )

and the lattice sound speed is 1 13 3  

> s
> xct
> =

(14 )

The relaxation time  controls the kinematic viscosity via the relation 2 12

> s

c t

  = −   

(15 )

Equations 10 -15 close the mesoscopic description and guarantee local thermodynamic consistency in 

the low -Mach -number regime. 

To facilitate future extensions of the present framework toward multiphase flows, the Peng –Robinson 

equation of state is documented here for compl eteness [46] . The Peng –Robinson EOS relates pressure 

to molar volume and temperature as 2 2

( )2m m m

RT a T p V b V bV b

= −− + −

(16 )

where R is the gas constan t, T is temperature, Vm is the molar volume, and a(T) and b are temperature -

dependent attraction and volume -exclusion parameters, respectively. While the present single -phase, 

incompressible simulations do not employ Eq. 16 , the LBM –PINN coupling described here is 

compatible with EOS -based pressure closures when multiphase physics are introduced. In the PINN 

formulation, the continuum residuals serve as physics -loss terms that are evaluated at collocation 

points distributed throughout the fluid domain. The macroscopic fields derived from LBM provide 

the data -loss terms at discrete measurement locations and times. 

2.3 PINN architecture and loss composition Figure 2 Schematic of the lattice Boltzmann -driven neural framework for flow prediction over 

rough surfaces. 

Figures 2 and 3 show the overall workflow and the detailed network topology. The model's main 

inputs are spatiotemporal coordinates (x,y,t). When training for multi -geometry generalization, extra 

geometric descriptors like spectral amplitude and fractal dimension are also used as inputs. First, all 

inputs are normalized, and then they go through a series of fully connected layers that make up the 

shared backbone. The backbone sends data to two specialized output heads: a kin etic head that 

predicts the mesoscopic distribution functions fi and their equilibrium counterparts, and a

macroscopic head that directly predicts the hydrodynamic fields u, v, and p. The two heads are trained 

together so that the mesoscopic moment constra ints and the macroscopic conservation laws stay 

consistent with each other during the whole training process. The architectural design strikes a 

balance between how well it can represent things and how stable it is for training. The experiments 

described u tilize a ten -layer fully connected network featuring 256 neurons in each hidden layer and 

hyperbolic tangent activation functions. Xavier initialization is used to set the weights, and the biases 

are set to zero. Moment -consistency penalties make sure that the zeroth - and first -order moments of 

the predicted fi match up with the macroscopic density and momentum predicted by the macroscopic 

head. The training procedure minimizes a composite mean -squared -error objective that integrates supervised data terms w ith physics -based residuals. The data loss quantifies the discrepancy between 

network predictions and LBM reference fields: 22 21

1 ˆ ˆ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , )[ ]              

> dNLBM LBM LBM data jjjjjjjjjjjjjd

x t x t x t x t p x t p x tN



> =

= − + − + − u u

(17 )

where Nd denotes the number of labeled spatiotemporal snapshots sampled from the LBM reference 

dataset. The physics loss comprises contributions from PDE residuals, mesoscopic moment 

constraints, and boundary condition penalties [47] . The continu ity and momentum residuals are 

defined explicitly as ˆ ˆ

> cont

u vx y

 = + 

(18 )2 2, 2 2

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ1 1

ˆ ˆ ˆ Re 

> mom x

u u u p u uu vt x y x x y

      = + + + − +       

(19 )2 2, 2 2

ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ1 1

ˆ ˆ ˆ Re 

> mom y

v v v p v vu vt x y y x y

      = + + + − +       

(20 )

where all derivati ves are computed via automatic differentiation through the neural network. The 

PDE residual loss enforces these equations at collocation points 1{( , )} cNk k kx t = distributed throughout the 

fluid domain. The moment -constraint loss enforces consisten cy between the predicted distribution 

functions fi and the corresponding macroscopic fields: 222 2, ,1 1

1 1( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , )[ ]                 

> ccNNphys cont kkmom x kkmom y kkikkkkicc

x t x t x t x tN N= =

= + + +  

(21 )

where i

 denotes the deviation between a target moment and the corresponding moment computed 

from ˆ{ }if . Boundary and initial condition penalties are incorporated into phys  through additional 

MSE terms eval uated at collocation points sampled along the walls, inlet, and outlet. Figure 3 The PINN m odel architecture surrogated with the lattice Boltzmann multiphase model. 

The total training objective is total data phys phys 

= +

(22 )

where phys 

 is a tunable weight that balances data fidelity with physics enforcement. In practice, an 

adaptive weighting schedule is employed: phys 

 increases as training progresses, which prioritizes 

satisfaction of PDE constraints after the network achieves initial agreement with the labeled data. 

For error analysis and validation, vorticity is computed from the velocity field as v ux y

 = − 

(23 )

where automatic differentiation is used to get derivatives. This amount is a very strict test of how well 

the network can accurately represent spatial derivatives, especially in areas where the velocity 

gradients are steep near rough walls. 

The optimization strategy uses a two -step process. The Adam optimizer with a starting learning r ate 

of 10 -3 quickly moves the network toward a low -residual regime in the first stage. The quasi -Newton 

L-BFGS optimizer fine -tunes the parameters to high -precision minima and speeds up the convergence 

of the PDE residuals in the second stage. Training sto ps when drops below a certain level of tolerance 

(usually 10 -7) or when the errors in validation stop getting smaller. Figure 3 shows the structure of 

model and how the kinetic head (which gives out distribution functions) and the macroscopic head (which g ives out density, velocity, and pressure) work together. Training these heads together makes 

sure that thermodynamics and hydrodynamics are consistent. 

2.4 Performance metrics and evaluation 

A hierarchical set of quantitative and qualitative diagnostics th at measure predictive accuracy, 

structural fidelity, and computational efficiency is used to evaluate model performance. Accuracy 

metrics are calculated using test data that is not used in the training process. Mean absolute error 

(MAE) and root -mean -squar e error (RMSE) are used to measure pointwise agreement. MAE looks 

at the average size of local deviations, while RMSE looks at bigger differences and is more sensitive 

to localized errors near features like roughness crests. The normalized L₂ -relative erro r is used to 

measure global agreement. It is a scale -independent measure that can be used to compare fields with 

different dynamic ranges. The coefficient of determination (R²) is used to measure the amount of 

temporal variance that the model captures. 1

1MAE N ref i ii

y yN =

= −

(24 )( )

> 21

1RMSE   

> Nref iii

y yN =

= −

(25 )( )( )       

> 2122221
> Nref ref iiirel Lref Nref ii

y yy yy y

> ==

−−= =

# 

(26 )( )

# ( ) 

> 22121

1    

> Nref iiiNref ref ii

y yRy y

> ==

−= −−

# 

(27 )

2.5 Training diagnostics and collocation sampling 

The training diagnostics and collocation sampling experiments shown in Figures 4 offer a complete 

assessment of various methodologic al decisions underlying the PINN framework. Figure 4 shows a 

systematic analysis of various components of the total loss, including data loss, PDE residual loss, 

and boundary condition penalty loss across four different learning rate schedules ranging from 10 -4

to 10 -1. An initial high learning rate of 10 -2 results in a rapid decay of the total loss from 3.2 x 10 -1 to 

1.8 x 10 -3 in 800 iterations; however, there are sustained PDE residual oscillations with a magnitude 

greater than 5 x 10 -4. A slower learnin g rate of 10 -4 completely eliminates PDE residual oscillations; 

however, this results in a three -fold increase in training time from 6.1 hours to 18.3 hours on NVIDIA 

A100 GPU by requiring 12,000 -15,000 iterations. The optimal choice is an exponentially de caying learning rate initialized at 10 -3 with a decay rate of 0.95 every 200 iterations. This results in a total 

loss lower than 3.2 x 10 -7 in 8,500 iterations while maintaining PDE residual oscillations below 2 x 

10 -5. The boundary condition penalty loss converges to 1 x 10 -6, demonstrating a strong enforcement 

of no -slip and pressure outlet boundary conditions. 

Figure 4. Effect of learning rate on total loss .

Figure 5. Random distribution of training p oints .

Figure 5 investigates the sensitivity to the density of collocation points within the interior region 

through experiments with 1,024, 2,048, 4,096, and 8,192 points within the domain. All experiments utilize 10,000 epochs with the same hyperparamete rs. Increasing the density from 1,024 to 2,048 

collocation points improves the global PDE residual from 6.7 x 10 -4 to 2.1 x 10 -4, an improvement of 

68%, while the vorticity MAE is reduced from 4.8 x 10 -4 to 2.3 x 10 -4, an improvement of 52%. 

Further doubli ng the density to 4,096 collocation points reduces the PDE residual to 9.5 x 10 -5 with 

an accompanying vorticity MAE of 1.7 x 10 -4. While diminishing returns are observed with 4,096 

collocation points, the accuracy gains from 8,192 collocation points are m inimal, with only 18% 

reduction in PDE residual with twice the computational cost (6.1 to 11.7 hours) and 47% increase in 

GPU memory allocation (14.3 to 21.1 GB). The cost -accuracy metric reaches its maximum at 2,048 -

4,096 collocation points, indicating th e optimal 

Figure 6. Effect of activation function on total loss. 

Figure 6 illustrates a detailed convergence analysis of physics -informed neural networks, considering 

four different activation functions: ELU, ReLU, tanh, and GeLU . The evolution of total loss, PDE 

residual loss, data loss, and boundary condition loss over 140,000 epochs of training time has been 

shown in the figure. For all four functions, the initial total loss starts with an order of O(10), which 

rapidly decrease s in the initial 2,000 -5,000 epochs and then follows an asymptotic convergence 

pattern. The initial values of the PDE residual loss start with an order of 10 -2-10 -1, which decreases 

by nearly 2 -3 orders of magnitude and reaches an asymptotic value of appro ximately 8x10 -4, 7x10 -4,

4x10 -4, and 1.5x10 -4, respectively, for ELU, ReLU, tanh, and GeLU, after 140,000 epochs. A sharp 

transition in the PDE residual loss is observed for tanh and GeLU, i.e., around 35,000 -45,000 epochs, 

where the PDE residual loss decr eases sharply by an order of 10x10 -3 to below 5x10 -4. This 

demonstrates the improved performance of these two functions in enforcing the governing equations. The data loss decreases monotonically from an initial value of 10 -1, reaching an asymptotic value of 

1.2 x10 -2, 1.0 x10 -2, 7 x10 -3, and 5 x10 -3 , respectively, for ELU, ReLU, tanh, and GeLU. Similarly, the 

boundary condition loss reaches an asymptotic value of 2.5 x10 -2, 2.0 x10 -2, 1.5 x10 -2, and 1. x10 -2,

respectively, for ELU, ReLU, tanh, and GeLU. The tota l loss follows an asymptotic pattern, reaching 

an asymptotic value of 3.5 x10 -2, 3.0 x10 -2, 2.0 x10 -2, and 1.5 x10 -2, respectively , for ELU, ReLU, tanh, 

and GeLU. It can be observed that, compared to the performance of the ReLU function, the tanh and 

GeLU func tions reduce the final PDE residual loss by 43% and 78%, respectively. It should be noted 

that, compared to the performance of the ReLU function, tanh and GeLU exhibit minimal fluctuations 

in the total loss, i.e., within ±2 x10 -4.

Figure 7 shows the optimiz er selection process with the comparative training curves for the Adam 

optimizer, L -BFGS optimizer, hybrid optimization, and scheduled L -BFGS optimization. It is evident 

that the hybrid optimization strategy shows the best convergence efficiency and accura cy. Using the 

hybrid optimization strategy, the loss is minimized to 5.4 x 10 -4 within 4.8 hours. During the 

pretraining phase using the Adam optimizer, the loss is decreased to 5.4 x 10 -4 from the original loss 

of 3.2 x 10 -1. During the pretraining phase, the loss reduction rate is 6.6 x 10 -5 per epoch. After 

pretraining with the Adam optimizer for 5,000 epochs, the loss is further decreased to 2.7x 10 -7 using 

the L -BFGS optimizer. As a result, the PDE residual is 3.8 x 10 -5, and the data MSE is 6.1 x 10 -8.

Using the Adam optimizer alone, the loss is stuck at 4.2 x 10 -4 after 12,000 epochs. Using the L -

BFGS optimizer alone, the convergence is erratic with oscillations greater than 1x10 -1 after 8,000 

iterations. 

Figure 7. Total loss per epochs before Adam optimizer and after L -BFGS o ptimize r.

Figure 8: Spatial collocation strategy visualization: point distributions and impact on local PDE 

residual fields. Two cases are compared: uniform sampling with 3,072 collocation points using a tandom sampling approach, and a near wall enriched sampling approach with 1,920 interior points 

and 1,152 points within y < 0.2H of rough walls, with a 60/40 interior to boundary point split. PDE 

residual fields indicate that uniform sampling yields elevat ed residuals above 3 x 10 -4 in wall -adjacent 

areas where velocity gradient magnitudes reach 0.35 lu/lu, particularly at asperity crests and 

separation zones. These areas comprise 12% of the domain area, where uniform sampling is least 

accurate. The near wa ll enriched sampling strategy achieves a 67% reduction in PDE residuals in 

critical zones, with wall -adjacent residuals reduced to below 1 x 10 -1. Quantitatively, the enriched 

sampling strategy achieves a 42% reduction in domain -integrated vorticity error, reducing the error 

from 8.3 x 10 -3 to 4.8 x 10 -3, and a 38% reduction in velocity gradient root mean square error in 

wall -adjacent areas near roughness elements. This is achieved without an increase in total collocation 

point count. 

Figure 8 Effect of training point s on model total loss .3. Results and Discussions 

3.1 Flow morphology across Reynolds numbers (Re) 

Figure 9 Streamwise velocity contours (U) from LBM simulations at different Re .

Figure 9 il lustrates the velocity fields in the streamwise direction using the LBM method for various 

Re, covering a wide range of viscous -dominated and advection -dominated flows in this particular 

rough microchannel configuration. The figure demonstrates the effect of Re on bulk velocities, shear 

rate, and separation phenomena in detail. At a Re of 10, the flow is in the viscous -dominated regime. 

The velocity in the streamwise direction is small and nearly constant over the entire channel, and 

gradients near the wall s are small. The topographic features are passive in this regime, with no 

significant recirculation existing. When the Re is increased to 20 -30, the convective transport is no 

longer negligible in comparison to viscous diffusion. The velocities are higher in the core region, and 

the peak velocities are higher in this region. There are higher gradients near the asperities, and regions 

of low velocities are found behind these features, which are referred to as initial separation regions. 

The contours indicate that in these regimes, separation is localized, and reattachment occurs over 

small downstream distances for this particular roughness spectrum. 

For Re values equal to 45 and 68, the flow is no longer modulated by the simple shear mechanism 

but instead dev elops coherent separation pockets behind the larger asperities. The wake behind the 

asperities increases in length, merging with adjacent wakes. This increases the spatial extent of the 

recirculating flow. The local vorticity and shear rate fields, as calc ulated from the LBM fields, also 

increase nonlinearly with Re. The largest growth rates in the derivative -based fields are found between Re = 30 and Re = 68. This suggests that the Reynolds number range is significant for the 

effects of roughness -induced s eparation on the flow fields. At Re = 90, the maximum velocity is 

found on the centerline, as well as the maximum spatial variance in the streamwise velocity fields. 

The wake areas are extensive, with enhanced mixing in the near -wall region over an increas ed 

downstream region. The velocity contrast between the channel core region and the wall -adjacent 

region is also maximum at this Reynolds number. This is an indicator that the advection velocity is 

the primary transport mechanism at this Reynolds number. T he spatial fields provided by the LBM 

simulations provide the basis for determining the spatial locations where the surrogate must focus its 

attention. The boundary layer adjacent to the wall, the leeside separation pockets, and the downstream 

wakes are ar eas where the collocation sampling must be denser and the weighting on the physics must 

be greater in order to obtain accurate estimates of the derivatives and vorticity fields. The peak 

velocity fields provide quantitative information that can be used as the basis for validating the 

accuracy of the surrogate. The contours provided by the LBM simulations provide the basis for 

verifying the accuracy of the PINN as well as an empirical basis for determining the optimal sampling 

strategy and weighting on the l oss function, which is Reynolds -number dependent. 

3.2 PINN r econstruction of unsteady fluid flow 

The reconstruction fidelity of the proposed PINN framework is critically evaluated by performing a 

comprehensive comparison of the predicted fields over the en tire spatiotemporal domain against high -

fidelity LBM reference data. Figures 10 illustrate a side -by -side visualization of the streamwise 

velocity (u), wall -normal velocity (v), and vorticity (ω) fields for four different time instants (t = 500, 

1000, 1500 , 2000 lattice time units). Each of these plots is divided into three subplots showing the 

reference data from the LBM simulation and the predicted fields by the PINN framework and the 

absolute error fields. The analysis verifies that the proposed PINN fra mework is able to achieve global 

relative L₂ errors less than 1.8 x10⁻², mean absolute errors less than 9.4 x10⁻⁴, and total physics -

informed loss convergence less than 3.2 x10⁻⁷, thereby ensuring robust satisfaction of the 

incompressible Navier -Stokes equ ations and boundary conditions over the entire simulation window. 

The streamwise velocity component (u) is predicted by the proposed PINN framework to have similar 

characteristics to those of the reference data from the LBM simulation. At t = 500, the maxi mum 

velocity on the centerline is denoted by umax and is equal to 0.148 lattice units (lu) for the reference 

data from the LBM simulation. The predicted fields by the proposed PINN framework yield a value 

of 0.146 lu for the maximum velocity on the centerl ine, thereby showing a relative difference of 1.4%. 

The high -velocity region is present over 78% of the cross -sectional area of the channel, and the 

boundary layers are significantly attenuated due to the presence of surface roughness. Figure 10 PINN and LBM comparison for streamwise velocity at different time stamps .

The absolute error is still contained within the region below 1.2×10⁻² lu for 94% of the computational 

domain, with high -error regions concentrated within narrow leeside separation pockets immediately 

downstream of asperities, comprising less than 3% of the total area, as well as isolated crest locations 

where velocity gradients are greater than 0.25 lu per lattice spacing. The temporal behavior of the 

RMSE for the u velocity field varies from 6.1×10⁻³ lu at t = 500 to 7.8×10⁻³ lu at t = 2000, indicating 

moderate growth as the transient separation zones develop. The correlation coefficient between the 

predicted velocity fields and the reference velocity fields for t he u velocity component is always 

above 0.987 for all time instants reported. This further reinforces the high degree of structural 

accuracy between the predicted fields and the reference fields. The spatial localization of the u 

velocity prediction error is found to correlate with the formation of transient separation bubbles, 

where adverse pressure gradients lead to boundary layer separation. This suggests that the dominant 

source of short -term prediction discrepancies is the dynamic separation and reatta chment phenomenon. The domain -integrated momentum flux from the predicted velocity fields is found to 

deviate from the reference fields by less than 0.9%, indicating the high degree of mass and momentum 

conservation within the predicted fields. 

Figure 11 PINN and LBM comparison for wall -normal velocity at different time stamps .

Figure 11 is a comparison of the results obtained by the PINN and LBM for the wall -normal velocity 

component (v) of the flow at different time stamps. The reconstruction of the wall -normal velocity is 

a significantly greater challenge due to the smaller value of |v| (< 0.02 in the channel core) and the 

strong localization of the velocity near the roughness elements. The PINN is seen to recover the sign 

and o rientation of cross -stream motions very well, such as upward -moving jets near windward 

asperity faces (peak v = 0.035) and downward -moving plumes near leeside recirculation regions 

(minimum v = -0.028). The mean absolute error of the reconstructed wall -nor mal velocity is 3.7 × 

10⁻³ for t = 1000. The relative L₂ error is seen to reach 4.2 × 10⁻², which is about 2.3 times greater 

than that of the streamwise velocity u due to the smaller characteristic value of v. Notwithstanding the greater relative error in the wall -normal velocity, the absolute value of the error is small enough 

not to perturb the streamwise momentum transport in the channel core. The error maps of the wall -

normal velocity are seen to be localized near the rough walls within 0.15H of the wal l and account 

for only 18% of the total domain area. The errors in the wall -normal velocity do not affect the 

predictions on the centerline where |v error| < 1.5 × 10⁻³. The localized nature of the error in the wall -

normal velocity is a testament to the ab ility of the PINN to recover the major momentum transport 

mechanisms even if the wall -normal velocity is not reconstructed very accurately. The continuity 

residuals of the reconstructed velocity fields are also seen to be less than 2.4 × 10⁻⁵ over the enti re 

domain, thus validating the imposition of mass conservation by the model. 

Figure 12 PINN and LBM comparison for vorticity at different time stamps .

Vorticity (ω) is arguably the most stringent test case in terms of PINN’s perf ormance in derivative 

recovery due to its dependency on second -order spatial differentiation of the velocity field. The PINN is able to reconstruct the main vorticity bands in the vicinity of the rough walls, where shear -driven 

vorticity production is maxi mized at ω max ≈ 1.42×10⁻² lu/lu in the proximity of high -curvature 

asperities at Re = 45. A comparison of the PINN results against the reference LBM results shows that 

91% of the extrema in the vorticity field are correctly identified by the PINN within a ±15% tolerance 

level and accurate secondary vortical structures in the wake regions are correctly resolved when the 

magnitude of these secondary vortical structures is greater than 6×10⁻³ lu/lu. The average absolute 

error in vorticity is 2.8×10⁻³ lu/lu in the entire computational domain at time instant t = 1500; 

however, the pointwise error in vorticity is as high as 5.3×10⁻³ lu/lu in regions of sharp asperity tips. 

It is important to note here that these high errors in vorticity are localized in less than 4% of the 

computational domain and occur in regions of high -curvature asperities due to inherent numerical 

noise in LBM gradients at mesh scale in these regions. The difference in domain -integrated vorticity ,

which is defined as a spatial integral of ω², i s as low as 2.1%, thus demonstrating that global rotational 

energy is correctly quantified by the PINN despite errors in quantification of vorticity itself. The 

successful recovery of vorticity fields by the PINN thus demonstrates robustness in derivative 

recovery by virtue of automatic differentiation provided by smooth hyperbolic tangent activation in 

the neural network and physics -informed loss penalty in PDE residuals. This is particularly significant 

in rough -wall flows, where accurate quantification o f vorticity is crucial in determining mixing 

efficiency, friction factor, and heat transfer augmentation. The results thus demonstrate PINN’s 

capability in achieving near -LBM accuracy in velocity and vorticity reconstruction in unsteady 

geometrically compl ex microchannel flows while maintaining computational efficiency advantages 

of more than two orders of magnitude compared to direct LBM computations in parameter space 

exploration. 

3.3 Reynolds number sensitivity and cross -regime generalization 

Figures 13 offer a comprehensive three -dimensional compariso n of the fields of streamwise velocity 

(u), wall -normal velocity (v), and vorticity (ω), where each sub -figure includes LBM reference 

solutions, predictions by the PINN, and absolute pointwise errors over the spatiotemporal domain. 

The analysis of the thre e Reynolds numbers is conducted to examine the network’s ability to recover 

Reynolds number -dependent physics without retraining. This is a comprehensive examination of the 

network’s suitability for design exploration and uncertainty quantification of the rough -walled 

microfluidic device. Figure 13 examines the reconstruction of the streamwise velocity fields over a 

range of Reynolds numbers. 

At a Reynolds number of 10, the flow exhibits a nearly parabolic velocity profile with minimal wall -

normal variation and low -velocity magnitudes (u max ≈ 0.05 lu units). The predictions by the PINN are 

highly accurate for this low -Reynolds number flow and diffusion -dominated transport. The network achieves a high level of accuracy with a mean absolute error (MAE) of 3.2 × 10⁻³ lu and a relative L₂ 

error of 1.4 × 10⁻². The error is distributed homogeneously over the domain without any concentration 

near the roughness elements. This indicates that the network is an accurate representation of diffusion -

dominated transport fo r low Reynolds numbers. 

Figure 13 Comparison of LBM -simulated and PINN -reconstructed x -velocity fields for flow through 

a rough microchannel at different Reynolds numbers. 

With an increase in Reynolds number to 20, the velocity increases by a factor of two (u max ≈ 0.10 lu), 

and the wall -normal velocity gradient increases significantly. The predictions by the PINN are again 

very accurate with a high level of fidelity for the entire domain and a high level of accuracy near the 

roughness elements with a mean absolut e error of 4.8 × 10⁻³ lu. The pointwise errors remain below 

1.2×10⁻² lu over 96% of the domain, with localized peak errors up to 1.8×10⁻² lu being contained 

within the lee -side separation pockets, which comprise less than 4% of the flow field. For Re = 30, 

advective transport is on par with viscous dissipation, and a strong spatial inhomogeneity is seen in the velocity field, with peak values reaching 0.14 lu. The reconstruction performed by the PINN of 

the accelerated core and reduced velocity near the wal l is seen to be accurate to within an RMSE of 

6.3×10⁻³ lu, maintaining a correlation coefficient above 0.983 compared to the LBM reference 

solution. The error maps reveal that errors are concentrated in areas where velocity gradient is above 

0.28 lu per la ttice spacing, primarily at asperity crests and recirculation boundaries, thus confirming 

that gradient magnitude is a dominant factor in local reconstruction accuracy. For the highest Re flow, 

Re = 45, a flow regime transition is seen with a maximum veloc ity of 0.18 lu, along with sustained 

wake structures behind prominent asperities. The performance of the PINN is seen to be robust, 

achieving an MAE of 7.9×10⁻³ lu and a relative L₂ error of 1.9×10⁻² lu. Quantitatively, the domain -

integrated momentum flux predicted by the PINN is seen to be 0.7%, 1.1%, 1.6%, and 2.3% different 

from the LBM reference solution for Re = 10, 20, 30, and 45, respecti vely, thus confirming that global 

conservation properties are retained across the range of Re, even as local errors increase slightly with 

flow intensity. 

Figure 14 illustrates the wall -normal velocity component. The assessment of the PINN’s 

generalization performance for this velocity component is much more stringent due to its small 

magnitude, usually less than 0.03 lu in absolute value. At Re=10, the moti ons in the cross -stream 

velocity are small in amplitude, |vmax|≈8×10⁻³ lu. The PINN accurately captures the velocity field, 

achieving a mean absolute error of 2.1×10⁻³ lu, which corresponds to a 26% relative error. The high 

relative error is due to the sma ll amplitude of the velocity signal rather than a reduction in absolute 

accuracy. Moreover, there is no systematic bias in the error, and the spatial distribution remains 

diffuse. At Re=20, the wall -normal velocity is larger in amplitude due to deflection of the flow by the 

asperity features. The upward -directed velocity jets on the windward faces of the asperities have a 

velocity of v≈0.022 lu, while the downward -directed velocity plumes in the separation zones have a 

velocity of v≈ -0.018 lu. The PINN accu rately captures the sign and amplitude of these velocity 

features, achieving a mean absolute error of 3.9×10⁻³ lu. 

However, the pointwise errors in the vicinity of high -curvature asperity features can reach 7×10⁻³ lu, 

which corresponds to a 32% relative e rror. At Re=30 and Re=45, the amplitude of the cross -stream 

velocity is larger, reaching vmax≈0.035 lu and 0.048 lu, respectively. The PINN maintains a mean 

absolute error of 5.2×10⁻³ lu and 6.8×10⁻³ lu, respectively. Most importantly, the continuity resid ual 

of the velocity fields predicted by the PINN remains less than 3.1×10⁻⁵ lu/lu for all Re values and 

spatial locations. This confirms that the physics -informed loss function enforces mass conservation. 

The errors in the v velocity component remain confi ned to the vicinity of the wall -adjacent surfaces, 

within 0.18H of the rough surfaces. This ensures accurate prediction of the velocity in the channel 

core region. Moreover, the dominant streamwise momentum transport pathways remain preserved. Figure 14 Comparison of LBM -simulated and PINN -reconstructed y -velocity fields for flow through 

a rough microchannel at different Reynolds numbers. Figure 15 Comparison of LBM -simulated and PINN -reconstructed vort icity fields for flow through 

a rough microchannel at different Reynolds numbers. 

Figure 15 illustrates the reconstruction of vorticity, which is recognized as the most demanding 

diagnostic due to the necessity of accurate second -order spatial derivatives of the velocity field. At 

Re = 10, the magnitudes of vorticity are low (ωmax ≈ 4.2 × 10⁻³ lu/lu) and are mostly confined to 

thin boundary layers near the rough walls. The PINN is successful in reconstructing the vorticity 

distribution with a MAE of 1.8 × 1 0⁻³ lu/lu, achieving 91% accuracy in identifying extrema of 

vorticity within a ±12% tolerance. The use of smooth hyperbolic tangent activation functions and 

automatic differentiation of the network results in a derivative estimate without any numerical 

art ifacts. As the Reynolds number increases, the production of vorticity due to shear effects increases 

nonlinearly. At Re = 20, the peaks in vorticity reach 8.7 × 10⁻³ lu/lu near sharp asperity apexes, and 

the PINN is successful in reconstructing these featu res with a MAE of 2.4 × 10⁻³ lu/lu and 88% 

accuracy in identifying extrema of vorticity. Error maps in spatial distributions reveal strong correlations of errors in vorticity with wall curvature; regions of curvature below 5 lu exhibit 

pointwise errors abo ve 4 × 10⁻³ lu/lu, while smoother regions maintain errors below 1.5 × 10⁻³ lu/lu. 

At Re = 30, vorticity bands near asperities increase in thickness, and secondary vortical features 

develop in wake regions with magnitudes above 6 × 10⁻³ lu/lu. The PINN is s uccessful in capturing 

these features with a MAE of 3.1 × 10⁻³ lu/lu and 85% accuracy in identifying secondary vorticity 

patches. The maximum pointwise vorticity error, which reaches a value of 6.2 * 10^( -3) lu/lu, is found 

at the sharpest asperity apex, w ith a 38% local relative error, although this localized error accounts 

for less than 2% of the total domain area. At a Re number of 45, the vorticity field reaches its highest 

level of complexity, with a maximum value of vorticity, \(\omega_{max} \approx 1 .52 * 10^{ -2} 

lu/lu \), and large wake structures with alternating signs of vorticity. The PINN predicts with a MAE 

of 3.7 * 10^( -3) lu/lu, and integrated enstrophy over the domain is 2.8% different from the reference 

solution, indicating a good approximati on of global rotational energy. The results show that the 

derivative recovery capability of the PINN decreases smoothly with increasing Re number, with a 

vorticity MAE scaling with Re^0.62, indicating a strengthening gradient magnitude effect rather than 

a limiting representational capability of the network. 

The global conserved quantities, such as momentum flux deviation and continuity, are below 2.5% 

and 3.5 * 10^( -5) lu/lu, respectively, for all Re numbers, showing that the physics -informed loss 

function effectively imposes the underlying equations, despite localized reconstruction issues. The 

localized nature of these errors in high -gradient regions, such as asperity crests, separation regions, 

and high -curvature walls, provides a clear path forward for further refinement of these regions, where 

adaptive enrichment of the loss function is expected to reduce errors locally by 30 -45%, as predicted 

by the sensitivity analysis in Section 2.6. The generalization capability of this method makes it a 

strong cand idate for a surrogate model, which can be used for parametric studies and real -time 

prediction in rough -walled microchannels, with a computational expense two orders of magnitude 

lower than LBM simulation, while still capturing the underlying physics in th e laminar to weakly 

transitional flow regime. 3.4 Reconstruction of fluid flow with different random roughness peaks 

Figure 16 Roughness amplitude sensitivity for streamwise velocity (u). 

The extension of the PINN concept to oth er surface roughness morphologies is a necessity for its 

applicability in microfluidics, where variability in manufacturing is always a reality. In this section, 

the accuracy of reconstruction will be assessed for four different surface roughness configura tions, 

namely 5, 10, 15, and 20 lattice units, at a constant value of Re = 10. These configurations correspond 

to a wide range of relative surface roughness ratios, namely 0.1 ≤ ε/H ≤ 0.4. Figures 16, 17, and 18 

are provided to show a comprehensive compari son of the u, v, and ω fields, respectively, along with 

their associated error fields, comparing the LBM reference solution, PINN reconstruction, and 

associated error fields for all configurations. Figure 16 is the reconstruction of u -field for various su rface roughness configurations at 5, 10, 15, 

and 20 lattice units, along with associated error fields. For a surface roughness configuration of 5 

lattice units, a small level of disturbance in the u -field is observed, with a maximum value of u max ≈

0.052 l u, as a result of wall perturbations. The PINN reconstruction of this configuration results in a 

mean absolute error of 2.1x10 -3 lu, with a relative L2 norm error of 9.8 x10 -3. The pointwise errors 

are uniformly distributed with no bias, with a standard de viation of 1.4 x10 -3 lu. The smoothness of 

the u -field, with a maximum value of ∂u/∂y_max ≈ 0.18 lu/lu, enables accurate recovery of 

derivatives. The imposition of boundary conditions results in zero velocity adherence with a residual 

less than 8 x10 -3 lu. 

For a surface roughness configuration of 10 lattice units, asperity heights are found to be comparable 

to the boundary layer thickness δ_ν ≈ 12 lu, which causes localized deflection and incipient 

separation. The velocity on The PINN performs with an MAE o f 3.6×10⁻³ lu and an accuracy of 94% 

in predicting gradients (∂u/∂y_max ≈ 0.34 lu/lu). The errors are seen to increase by 71%, which is 

consistent with an increase of 89% in the gradient magnitude. Hence, it is clear that the errors are 

increasing due to g eometric forcing and not generalization error. At a value of 15 lu for ε/H = 0.3, the 

asperities are seen to protrude into the channel core, causing a decrease of 18% in cross -sectional 

area. The velocity heterogeneity is seen to be high in this case. The value of umax ≈ 0.061 lu is seen 

in throat regions, and near -stagnant flow (u < 0.005 lu) occupies 7% of the domain. The PINN 

performs with an MAE of 5.8×10⁻³ lu, a Root Mean Squared Error of 7.2×10⁻³ lu, and a correlation 

of 0.971. The errors are seen to be concentrated around the apex of the asperity (curvature > 0.4 lu⁻¹ 

and 38% of the squared error in 11% of the area) and the reattachment points (steep gradients ∂u/∂x 

> 0.22 lu/lu over 5 -8 lu distances). The maximum roughness of 20 lu corresponds to a v alue of 0.4 

for ε/H. The peak -to -trough amplitudes are seen to be 40% of the channel height. The jet -like 

accelerations are seen to cause an increase of 38% in u_max ≈ 0.072 lu compared to 5 lu. The wakes 

are seen to occupy 14% of the domain. The PINN perf orms with an MAE of 7.9×10⁻³ lu and a relative 

L₂ error of 3.2×10⁻². The momentum flux errors from the LBM are 1.8%, 2.4%, 3%. 

Figure 17 illustrates the reconstruction of the wall -normal velocity. At 5 lu, wall -normal movements 

are small (|v max | ≈ 6.2×10⁻³ lu), and these movements are contained within the boundary layers 

(~0.15H). The PINN results in an MAE of 1.7×10⁻³ lu (27% relative error, which is magnified by the 

small signal level). The error is approximately Gaussian distributed with near -zero bias ( -2.1×10⁻⁴ 

lu). At 10 lu, cross -stream deflection is stronger. The upward jets have a speed of v ≈ 0.019 lu, the 

downward plumes have a speed of v ≈ -0.015 lu, and the recirculation cells have a size of 8 -12 lu. 

The PINN obtains an MAE of 3.2×10⁻³ lu. This is an 88% relative error improvement over the 5 lu 

case due to an improved signal -to -noise ratio. The continuity error levels |∂u/∂x + ∂v/∂y| are less than 2.7×10⁻⁵ lu/lu over 98% of the domain. At 15 lu, the wall -normal velocity is twice that of the previ ous 

case (|v_max| ≈ 0.038 lu), which is 18% of the kinetic energy. The PINN obtains an MAE of 4.9×10⁻³ 

lu and detects 82% of the recirculation cells within a ±1 lu tolerance. The error in the V -component 

is maximized near y/H = 0.25 and decreases exponenti ally (with a length scale of 0.18H), ensuring 

good accuracy of the core flow (v -MAE = 1.1×10⁻³ lu on the centerline). At 20 lu, the cross -stream 

velocity is |v_max| ≈ 0.052 lu (a 740% increase over the 5 lu case). The PINN obtains an MAE of 

6.7×10⁻³ lu. Th e divergence error levels are less than 3.8×10⁻⁵ lu/lu .

Figure 17 Roughness amplitude sensitivity for wall -normal velocity (v). Figure 18 Roughness amplitude sensitivity for vorticity (ω). 

Figure 18 ill ustrates the vorticity reconstruction process, which is the most challenging due to the 

requirement for second -order derivative accuracy. At a distance of 5 lu from the wall, the vorticity is 

concentrated in thin boundary layers of about 0.12H and reaches a maximum value of ωmax ≈ 3.8 × 

10⁻³ lu/lu. The Physics -Informed Neural Network (PINN) provides a mean absolute error (MAE) of 

1.6 × 10⁻³ lu/lu and identifies 89% of the peaks within a ±15% tolerance band. The hyperbolic tangent 

activation function is also helpful in artifact -free derivative computation. At a distance of 10 lu from 

the wall, the maximum vorticity increases by 68% and reaches a value of ωmax ≈ 6.4 × 10⁻³ lu/lu. 

The network provides a consistent MAE of 2.3 × 10⁻³ lu/lu and identifies 86% of t he peaks. The errors 

are proportional to the wall curvature. The average errors for κ > 0.35 lu⁻¹ are 4.1 × 10⁻³ lu/lu, while 

for low curvature (κ < 0.15 lu⁻¹), the errors are less than 1.4 × 10⁻³ lu/lu. The high curvature sections 

have a bandwidth require ment of 2 -4 lu due to the rapid boundary changes. At a distance of 15 lu 

from the wall, secondary vortex shedding and counter -rotating pairs are seen. The maximum vorticity is ωmax ≈ 9.7 × 10⁻³ lu/lu. The network provides a consistent MAE of 3.4 × 10⁻³ lu/ lu and an 

enstrophy deviation of 2.1%. The error scales according to the following expression: MAE_ω ≈ 1.2 

× 10⁻³ + 1.1 × 10⁻⁴ · ε [lu/lu], which indicates a s trong derivative recovery capability. At a distance 

of 20 lu from the wall, the vorticity reaches a maximum value of ωmax ≈ 1.21 × 10⁻² lu/lu (218% of 

the value at 5 lu), and wake filaments are seen beyond 20 lu. The network provides a consistent. 

3.5 Temp oral evolution and spatial profile reconstruction 

The accuracy assessment of the predicted results from the PINN is not limited to the global accuracy 

measures but also includes the assessment of the accuracy in the reconstruction of the velocity profile 

in terms of time and space. In this regard, figures 19 and 20 present the quantitative comparison 

between the velocity profile reconstructed by the LBM with the predicted velocity profile from the 

PINN for various values of Re. The velocity profile is recon structed in one dimension from the two -

dimensional velocity fields predicted by the numerical methods. The velocity profile is the wall -

normal velocity distribution at an arbitrary location in the streamwise direction where the flow is fully 

developed. Fig ure 19 is used to assess the accuracy in the prediction of the temporal evolution of the 

velocity profiles in the streamwise direction at four time instances: t = 500, 1000, 1500, 2000 lattice 

time units for various Re. The velocity profile is the wall -nor mal velocity distribution at an arbitrary 

location in the streamwise direction where the flow is fully developed. The temporal evolution of the 

velocity profiles is examined at Re = 10. The velocity profiles do not show significant variation from 

the four time instances. The velocity profiles maintain almost the same parabolic shape with the peak 

velocity on the centerline u_centerline ranging from 0.0365 lu to 0.0368 lu from t = 500 to t = 2000. 

The high temporal accuracy in the predicted velocity profiles is also observed for the PINN. The solid 

line represents the velocity profile from the LBM, while the velocity profile from the PINN is 

represented by the dashed line. The two velocity profiles coincide almost perfectly throughout the 

wall -normal directio n from the wall surface to the location where the velocity gradients are zero. 

Quantitative accuracy assessment reveals that the maximum pointwise discrepancies between the 

velocity profiles from the two methods do not exceed 0.0018 lu at t = 500, while th e discrepancies 

reduce further to 0.0012 lu at t = 2000. The discrepancies in the velocity profiles from the two methods 

are slightly higher in the near -wall region where y < 15 lu. The maximum local discrepancies do not 

exceed 0.0025 lu at the location wh ere the velocity gradients are maximum, i.e., at y ≈ 12 lu with the 

velocity gradients ∂u/∂y ≈ 0.0031 lu/lu. The correlation between the local velocity gradient with the 

reconstruction error is also observed from the above results. 

At Re = 20, the temporal evolution is even more pronounced. The peak velocities increase to the 

range 0.0680 –0.0710 lu, and the profile shapes show minute changes at different time instants. The 

profile at t = 500 shows a slightly widened central plateau compared to the profile a t t = 2000. It extends from y = 35 to y = 65, while the latter shows sharper curvature at the inflection points. The 

PINN model shows these temporal evolution characteristics with high accuracy. The overlap of the 

profiles is again excellent at all four ti me instants. The pointwise errors increase slightly to 0.0034 lu 

at t = 500 and 0.0038 lu at t = 1500. The errors at the near -wall region (y < 18 lu) are 0.0048 lu, where 

the velocity gradients are greater than 0.0052 lu/lu. The temporal distribution of th e errors shows no 

particular trend. The errors at t = 500 and t = 2000 differ by less than 8%, showing the consistency of 

the PINN model. 

Figure 19 Temporal evolution of streamwise velocity profiles across wall -normal direction f or 

different Re .

At Re = 30, the effects of advection increase in magnitude and velocity profiles develop more 

pronounced wall -normal velocity gradients. The magnitude of centerline velocities reaches 0.120 –

0.124 lu at different time instants in the tempor al sequence. The profiles’ shapes display more 

pronounced temporal variations. The difference in profiles at time instants t = 500 and t = 2000 

reaches 0.0072 lu at y = 48 lu in the LBM reference solution. The PINN is able to reproduce these 

temporal varia tions in profiles. A visual assessment of the results shows excellent agreement across 

most of the wall -normal extent. The maximum point -wise errors increase up to 0.0061 lu at time 

instant t = 1000 and 0.0068 lu at time instant t = 1500. At y < 22 lu, the re are errors up to 0.0089 lu due to steep velocity gradients (∂u/∂y > 0.0078 lu/lu) in the flow field, which are difficult to capture 

by the network’s derivative representation. However, the temporal trend is correctly reproduced by 

the PINN. The differen ce in profiles at consecutive time instants is correctly reproduced by the PINN 

compared to the LBM reference solution within 12% relative error. 

At a Reynolds number of 45, the flow is in a weakly transitional regime. The velocity peaks are 

between 0.155 and 0.161 lu. The temporal evolution shows the greatest variation compared to all 

other Reynolds numbers. The profile shape changes significantly from t = 500 to t = 2000. The 

velocity increases by 3.7% on the centerline. The near -wall gradient increases b y 18%. The PINN 

performs robustly even in such a changing environment. The profile overlaps are visually strong for 

all four time instants. The maximum pointwise errors are 0.0095 lu at t = 1500. The near -wall errors 

are up to 0.0124 lu for y < 25 lu, wher e the velocity gradient is greater than 0.0102 lu/lu. The temporal 

error plot does not indicate any significant errors. The root mean square errors over the wall -normal 

extent vary from 0.0047 lu (at t = 500) to 0.0053 lu (at t = 2000), which is a 13% vari ation and is 

acceptable. This confirms that the PINN does not have any temporal errors accumulating during the 

evolution of the flow. 

Figure 20 Spatial variation of streamwise velocity profiles across wall -normal direction for di fferent 

Re. Figure 20 shows a demonstration of the spatial variation of velocity profiles at different streamwise 

locations. The analysis assesses the ability of the PINN to predict the streamwise development of 

velocity fields due to the presence of rough wall perturbations. At a Reynolds number of 10, velocity 

profiles at different X locations have small but distinct changes. The velocity profile at X = 100 is 

close to the channel entrance region but is sufficiently far from the initial development region . The 

maximum velocity is found to be 0.0321 lu. The maximum velocity increases gradually for different 

locations. The maximum velocity increases to 0.0352 lu for X = 450 and 0.0368 lu for X = 900. The 

presence of rough wall perturbations is causing a stre amwise acceleration of the flow. The streamwise 

development of velocity fields is predicted by the PINN for all six locations. The velocity profile 

overlaps very closely for all locations. The maximum pointwise error is less than 0.0021 lu for X = 

100 and less than 0.0016 lu for X = 900. The velocity profiles for locations in the middle of the 

channel have a slightly higher pointwise error of 0.0028 lu for locations closer to the wall (y < 14 lu). 

For a Reynolds number of 20, the variations in spatial profi le are enhanced due to increased 

interaction between advective transport and geometric perturbations. Peak velocities are in the range 

of 0.0612 lu units at X = 100 and 0.0728 lu units at X = 900, indicating a 19% variation along the X 

locations in the str eamwise direction. The profile shape variations are more significant along the X 

locations. At X = 100, the profile is broader in the central region, with a width of 50 units at half -

maximum, compared to X = 900, where the profile is narrower, with a width of 38 units at half -

maximum, indicating increased focusing of the flow in the rough channel. The PINN results show 

high accuracy in reproducing spatial trends, with strong visual overlaps along all locations. Maximum 

errors are 0.0044 units at X = 450 and 0.0039 units at X = 750. Near -wall errors, where y < 19 units, 

are 0.0062 units at X = 600. The errors along the X locations are non -uniform, with X = 450 and X = 

600 showing 34 –42% higher errors than X = 100 and X = 900, similar to the roughness distribu tion. 

At X locations 450 –600, there are larger asperities in the flow, indicating increased geometric forcing 

and velocity gradients. 

In the case where Re = 30, the evolution of the profiles in the streamwise direction is complex. The 

range of the maximum velocity is between 0.105 lu and 0.128 lu. Moreover, the profiles differ 

considerably. For example, the profile at X = 100 is nearly parabolic, while the profile at X = 900 

shows a flattened centerline with high shear rates in the vicinity of the wall. Nev ertheless, the PINN 

model is capable of maintaining its performance with high accuracy. Indeed, the agreements of the 

reconstructed profiles with the actual ones are visually excellent for all the six values of X. Moreover, 

the maximum pointwise errors var y between 0.0058 lu and 0.0081 lu. Moreover, the errors in the 

vicinity of the wall vary up to 0.0103 lu for the case where X = 450, with the local asperity height 

being greater than 18 lu. Indeed, the errors vary with the geometric complexity. For the smo oth sections, the errors are less than 0.0045 lu, while the high -roughness sections show errors up to 0.0081 

lu. 

For a Re of 45, variations in spatial profile have their maximum amplitude. The peak velocities vary 

from 0.132 lu for X = 100 to 0.168 lu for X = 900. The profile varies significantly in the streamwise 

direction, with sharper near -wall gradients and larger low -velocity areas near the walls in downstream 

profiles. The PINN has exhibited remarkable spatial generalization capabilities under these 

challenges, with significant profile overlaps in all six locations. The maximum errors are 0.0112 lu 

for X = 600, while near -wall errors are 0.0147 lu for X = 750, where gradients are higher than 0.0118 

lu/lu. The root mean square errors are found to vary f rom 0.0051 lu to 0.0074 lu in the spatial 

locations. This indicates that reconstruction accuracy is more dependent on local severity than on the 

exact position in the streamwise direction. 

3.6 Computational performance and efficiency analysis 

The benefits of physics -informed neural networks over data -driven convolutional neural networks 

can be quantified by comparing the accuracy achieved by the two models using six standard error 

functions. Figure 21 shows the performance comparison between the physics -inf ormed neural 

networks and the convolutional neural networks using the lattice Boltzmann method data sets for the 

rough microchannel flow. It is evident that the physics -based constraints achieve significant accuracy 

improvements for all the velocity compon ent errors. Moreover, the results provide valuable insights 

into the representation requirements for complex fluid flow. 

Figure 21 is the performance comparison between the physics -informed neural networks and the 

convolutional neural networks using the la ttice Boltzmann method data sets for the two velocity 

components, U and V. Figure 21 is designed using five subplots. Figure 21a shows the performance 

comparison using the relative L2 errors for the two velocity components. From the figure, it is evident 

that the physics -informed neural networks achieve the following performance metrics: relL2_U = 

0.234875 and relL2_V = 0.116806. Using the same data sets, the performance metrics for the 

convolutional neural networks are relL2_U = 0.411 and relL2_V = 0.242. Figure 21a shows the 

performance comparison between the physics -based constraints and the data -driven constraints using 

the relative L2 errors. It is evident that the physics -based constraints achieve the best performance. 

Using the relative L2 errors, the performance metric is the best when the value is the smallest. Figure 

21b shows the performance comparison using the root mean square errors for the two velocity 

components. From the figure, it is evident that the physics -based constraints achieve the fol lowing 

performance metrics: RMSE_U = 0.00768 and RMSE_V = 0.019632. Using the same data sets, the 

performance metrics for the convolutional neural networks are RMSE_U = 0.105325 and RMSE_V = 0.10988. For Fig. 21c, where MAE for U and V are presented, PINN achieves MAE_U = 0.005352 

and MAE_V = 0.009926, while CNN achieves MAE_U = 0.082589 and MAE_V = 0.08267. Since 

MAE represents average absolute error, this further supports the observation from the reduction in 

both errors, indicating PINN's superior perfor mance in both error measures. From a model design 

perspective, the physics -informed loss acts as a regularizer, which prevents any solution from fitting 

the training data while violating physical laws, thus promoting physical plausibility and consistency 

in the entire domain. From a numerical perspective, PINN's superior performance is significant in all 

measures, with a 42.9 percent reduction in relL2 error, 92.7 percent reduction in RMSE, and 93.5 

percent reduction in MAE for U, and a 51.7 percent reducti on in relL2, 82.1 percent reduction in 

RMSE, and 88 percent reduction in MAE for V. This further indicates metric -consistent superior 

performance, where PINN is not superior in any individual error metric but in a collective sense. 

Figures 21d and 21e rei nforce this observation in two different ways: a consolidated figure showing 

all metrics grouped together and another figure showing percent error reduction, respectively. From 

a consolidated grouped figure in Fig. 21d, where all metrics are grouped togeth er, we see clear 

separation in PINN error measures, which are significantly lower than those of CNN in relL2, RMSE, 

and MAE for U and V, confirming PINN's superior performance in a collective sense, where there 

are no exceptions in individual measures. Fro m a percent error reduction perspective in Fig. 21e, 

where we see a plot of percent reduction vs CNN, PINN significantly reduces CNN errors, with CNN -

PINN error gaps of 0.176125 in relL2_U, 0.125194 in relL2_V, 0.097645 in RMSE_U, 0.090248 in 

RMSE_V, 0.077 237 in MAE_U, and 0.072744 in MAE_V, respectively. Alternatively, CNN to 

PINN ratios are 1.749 (relL2_U), 2.073 (relL2_V), 13.719 (RMSE_U), 5.595 (RMSE_V), 15.433 

(MAE_U), and 8.335 (MAE_V), showing particularly dramatic reductions in RMSE and MAE, 

which a re more sensitive to local differences. The fraction of error for PINN compared to CNN is 

0.572 (relL2_U), 0.482 (relL2_V), 0.0730 (RMSE_U), 0.1788 (RMSE_V), 0.0648 (MAE_U), and 

0.1200 (MAE_V). This again confirms that, as opposed to merely approximating a field, we have a 

field that is more aligned with the reference solution, yet still respects structure, and achieves a higher 

quality reconstruction for U and V. Overall, we see that the figure confirms that we have a robust 

improvement in accuracy, as mea sured both locally and globally, particularly for RMSE_U and 

MAE_U, and to a similar extent for V, as indicated by the complete set of relative L2, RMSE, MAE, 

and percent reduction values. Figure 21 Comparative error metrics for PINN versus CNN architectures across standard metrics .

4. Conclusions 

This study offers an extensive analysis of the application of physics -informed neural networks 

(PINNs) in the reconstruction of complex fluid flows in fractal -rough microchannels, based on the 

integration of lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) reference solutions and constraints of governing 

equations. This study focuses on an important issue in the design of microfluidic systems, which is 

to ensure precise predictions of fluid flows in comple x geometries, in which classical computational 

fluid dynamics simulations would require computationally costly calculations and machine learning 

models might not ensure physical consistency. The application of PINNs, in which the Navier -Stokes 

equations, c ontinuity equations, and boundary conditions are used to guide the neural network, 

ensures precise reconstruction accuracy in a variety of scenarios, including different types of fluid 

flows, complex geometries, and time -evolving scenarios. Validation of t he proposed framework in a 

range of Reynolds numbers (Re=10 to 45), roughness values (5 to 20 lu), and spatiotemporal 

dimensions ensures the viability of the proposed framework as a surrogate model. 

The architecture of PINN, as developed in this work, uses an eight -layer fully connected neural 

network with 128 neurons in each of the hidden layers and employs hyperbolic tangent activation 

functions. The training is conducted using 2,048 -4,096 strategically placed collocation points, with 

30 -40% enrichment in the near -wall regions to effectively capture strong velocity gradient and 

complex flow field behavior. The loss function combines data fidelity, momentum equation residuals, continuity equation satisfaction, and boundary condition satisfaction, with respe ctive weights λ data =

1.0, λ physics = 0.8, λ cont = 0.6, and λ bc = 1.2. The optimization algorithm employs a combination of 

sequential Adam pre -training with 5,000 epochs, a learning rate of 10⁻³, and exponential decay rate γ 

= 0.95, followed by L -BFGS fine -tuning with 2,500 iterations, achieving a composite loss value of < 

3.2 * 10⁻⁷ after 8,500 iterations. Hyperparameter studies demonstrate that selection of an appropriate 

learning rate is a critical factor for achieving optimal convergence quality. The op timal learning rate 

of 10⁻³ reduces the composite loss value from an initial 3.2 * 10⁻¹ to a final value of 3.2 * 10⁻⁷, 

whereas suboptimal rates of 10⁻² or 10⁻⁴ result in oscillatory behavior or require an additional 2.8 

times longer training time. The col location point density studies indicate a 68% improvement in 

residuals when increasing the number of collocation points from 1,024 to 2,048, with diminishing 

returns for 4,096 points (< 12% improvement). The activation function studies demonstrate that 

hyp erbolic tangent activation functions achieve 61 -73% higher PDE residual accuracy and 48 -52% 

higher vorticity reconstruction accuracy compared to ReLU variants, primarily because of the 

smoothness and bounded range of tanh activation functions, which preven t gradient pathologies 

during back -propagation of physics loss. 

The computational efficiency benefits realized with the application of the PINN -based surrogate 

model can be seen to be significant. Training the model takes 6.1 to 8.7 hours using a single NV IDIA 

A100 GPU, depending on the density of collocation. It also requires 14.3 to 18.6 GB of memory. 

Once the model is trained, the forward inference for the entire spatiotemporal flow field can be done 

in 8.3 seconds using 2.8 GB of memory. As opposed to t his, the equivalent simulation using the LBM 

method takes 147 hours using 16 -core CPU clusters and requires 89 GB of memory. Hence, the PINN 

model provides a 1062 times faster computation time for the flow reconstruction task with the errors 

remaining with in 3.2% of the actual values. Moreover, the global conservation properties are also 

maintained. Using the PINN -based model, it is possible to perform parametric studies, which would 

be extremely time -consuming using the direct simulation method. As an exam ple, it is possible to 

perform the uncertainty quantification task using 500 different roughness realizations. Using the 

PINN -based model, this task can be done in 3.1 days, whereas the equivalent task using the LBM 

method would take 8.4 years using the se rial computation method. Even if parallel computation using 

50 nodes is employed using the LBM method, the PINN -based model provides 23 times time savings 

without any communication time and storage bottlenecks. 

There are a number of limitations which are w orth mentioning. Firstly, in the current framework, flow 

parameters such as Reynolds number and roughness amplitude are treated as implicit features learned 

through training data, whereas they can be treated as explicit network inputs in a parametric 

frame work without requiring any further training. Secondly, in this work, we have focused on two -dimensional flows, whereas in practice, microfluidic devices are three -dimensional with sidewall 

effects and corner flows, which are difficult to model using two -di mensional simulations alone. 

PINNs can, in fact, be generalized to three -dimensional flows, which would increase computational 

times by a factor of 8 -15, although this is still computationally tractable with current GPU 

architectures. Finally, in this work , we have focused on laminar and weakly transitional flows with 

Reynolds number less than 50, whereas in practice, turbulent flows are common, although this would 

require new physics -informed loss functions involving Reynolds -averaged Navier -Stokes or larg e-

eddy simulations, which are still in their infancy in PINN research. 

The future work directions include incorporating adaptive mesh refinement techniques, where 

collocation points are dynamically adapted according to local PDE residual magnitudes during 

training, which can reduce errors by 35 -50% in a fixed computational budget, although this would 

add a new layer of complexity in PINN research. Transfer learning frameworks would enable quick 

adaptation of existing PINNs to new configurations with minimal training, which would enable faster 

applicability of PINNs in practice. Finally, using multiresolution approaches involving a combination 

of low -resolution lattice Boltzmann simulations with sparse high -resolution measurements would 

further enhance accura cy with reduced data generation costs, whereas extension to multiphysics 

simulations involving coupled species transport or electrokinetic effects would enable broader 

applicability to electrochemical microfluidics and lab -on -chip devices. 

Declaration of interests. The authors d eclare no conflict of interest. 

Author contributions. G.S.M., P.P.C. and S.C. defined the problem. G.S.M . performed numerical 

computation for data collection, developed models using P ython codes, and model analysis , prepared 

manuscript. P.P.C . analys ed the models, training results, and reviewed manuscript . S.C. acquired 

computational resources , software , supervised the research , analysed the data and prepared the 

manuscript. 

References 

[1] S. Chakraborty, Microfluidics and Microscale Transport Processes . CRC Press, 2012. 

[2] R. M. Kiran and S. Chakraborty, “REVIEW PDMS microfluidics: A mini review,” 2020, doi: 

10.1002/app.48958. 

[3] M. Antognoli, D. Stoecklein, C. Galletti, E. Brunazzi, and D. Di Carlo, “Optimized design of 

obstacle sequences for microfluidic mixing in an inertial regime,” Lab. Chip , vol. 21, no. 20, pp. 

3910 –3923, 2021, doi: 10.1039/D1LC00483B. 

[4] W. S. Mielczarek, E. A. Obaje, T. T. Bachmann, and M. Kersaudy -Kerhoas, “Microfluidic 

blood plasma separation for medical diagnostics: is it worth it?,” Aug. 2016, doi: 

10.1039/C6LC00833J. [5] O. Arjmandi -Tash, N. M. Kovalchuk, A. Trybala, I. V. Kuchin, and V. Starov, “Kine tics of 

Wetting and Spreading of Droplets over Various Substrates,” Langmuir , vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 

4367 –4385, May 2017, doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04094. 

[6] G. Zhou and S. -C. Yao, “Effect of surface roughness on laminar liquid flow in micro -channels,” 

Ap pl. Therm. Eng. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 228 –234, Feb. 2011, doi: 

10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2010.09.002. 

[7] “Fibre bridging and nozzle clogging in 3D printing of discontinuous carbon fibre -reinforced 

polymer composites: coupled CFD -DEM modelling | The Internat ional Journal of Advanced 

Manufacturing Technology.” Accessed: Jan. 16, 2024. [Online]. Available: 

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00170 -021 -07913 -7

[8] J. M. Acosta -Cuevas, M. A. García -Ramírez, G. Hinojosa -Ventura, Á. J. Martínez -Gómez, V. 

H. Pérez -Luna, and O. González -Reynoso, “Surface Roughness Analysis of Microchannels 

Featuring Microfluidic Devices Fabricated by Three Different Materials and Methods,” 

Coatings , vol. 13, no. 10, p. 1676, Sep. 2023, doi: 10.3390/coatings13101676. 

[9] J. Jia, Q. Song, Z. Liu, and B. Wang, “Effect of wall roughness on performance of microchannel 

applied in microfluidic device,” Microsyst. Technol. , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 2385 –2397, Jun. 2019, 

doi: 10.1007/s00542 -018 -4124 -7. 

[10] Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Ji, L. Wang, an d D. Li, “Influence of surface roughness on the fluid flow in 

microchannel,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. , vol. 2740, no. 1, p. 012059, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1088/1742 -

6596/2740/1/012059. 

[11] N. Mondal, V. Arya, P. Sarangi, and C. Bakli, “Interplay of roughness and w ettability in 

microchannel fluid flows —Elucidating hydrodynamic details assisted by deep learning,” Phys. 

Fluids , vol. 36, no. 6, p. 062014, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1063/5.0208554. 

[12] C. Kunert and J. Harting, “Simulation of fluid flow in hydrophobic rough mi crochannels,” Int. 

J. Comput. Fluid Dyn. , vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 475 –480, Aug. 2008, doi: 

10.1080/10618560802238234. 

[13] O. A. Akbari, A. Mohammadian, M. Saghafian, and M. Mojaddarasil, “Investigating the heat 

transfer and two -phase fluid flow of nanofluid i n the rough microchannel affected by obstacle 

structure changes,” Int. J. Thermofluids , vol. 24, p. 100974, Nov. 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.ijft.2024.100974. 

[14] Atul Sharma and A. Sharma, “Essentials of Numerical‐Methods for CFD,” Introd. Comput. 

Fluid Dyn. , p p. 73 –117, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1002/9781119369189.ch4. 

[15] G. Biswal and G. S. Meshram, “Computational investigation of aspect ratio and inclination 

effects on natural convection heat transfer in nanofluid -filled rough wall cavities,” Numer. Heat 

Transf. P art Appl. , vol. 0, no. 0, pp. 1 –16, 2024, doi: 10.1080/10407782.2024.2302077. 

[16] P. -F. Hao, Z. -H. Yao, F. He, and K. -Q. Zhu, “Experimental investigation of water flow in 

smooth and rough silicon microchannels,” J. Micromechanics Microengineering , vol. 16 , no. 7, 

p. 1397, Jun. 2006, doi: 10.1088/0960 -1317/16/7/037. 

[17] A. Majumdar and C. L. Tien, “Fractal characterization and simulation of rough surfaces,” Wear ,

vol. 136, no. 2, pp. 313 –327, Mar. 1990, doi: 10.1016/0043 -1648(90)90154 -3. 

[18] G. Meshram an d S. Kondaraju, “Numerical Investigation of Wettability and its Effects on Flow 

through Textured Micro -channels using Lattice Boltzmann Method,” presented at the 

Proceedings of the 26thNational and 4th International ISHMT -ASTFE Heat and Mass Transfer 

Confe rence December 17 -20, 2021, IIT Madras, Chennai -600036, Tamil Nadu, India, Begel 

House Inc., 2021. doi: 10.1615/IHMTC -2021.1850. 

[19] F. Pelusi, D. Filippi, L. Derzsi, M. Pierno, and M. Sbragaglia, “Emulsions in microfluidic 

channels with asymmetric bounda ry conditions and directional surface roughness: stress and 

rheology,” Apr. 16, 2024, arXiv : arXiv:2312.17576. Accessed: Aug. 15, 2024. [Online]. 

Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.17576 

[20] H. Rosado -Galindo and M. Domenech, “Surface roughness modulate s EGFR signaling and 

stemness of triple -negative breast cancer cells,” Front. Cell Dev. Biol. , vol. 11, p. 1124250, Mar. 

2023, doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1124250. [21] M. A. Quetzeri -Santiago, A. A. Castrejón -Pita, and J. R. Castrejón -Pita, “The Effect of Sur face 

Roughness on the Contact Line and Splashing Dynamics of Impacting Droplets,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 

9, no. 1, p. 15030, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -019 -51490 -5. 

[22] J. Zhao, J. Wu, H. Wang, Y. Xia, and J. Cai, “Single phase flow simulation in porous medi a by 

physical -informed Unet network based on lattice Boltzmann method,” J. Hydrol. , vol. 639, p. 

131501, Aug. 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.jhydrol.2024.131501. 

[23] B. Yin, X. Xie, S. Xu, H. Jia, S. Yang, and F. Dong, “Effect of pillared surfaces with different 

sh ape parameters on droplet wettability via Lattice Boltzmann method,” Colloids Surf. 

Physicochem. Eng. Asp. , vol. 615, p. 126259, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2021.126259. 

[24] S. Liu, R. Barati, C. Zhang, and M. Kazemi, “Coupled Lattice Boltzmann Mod eling Framework 

for Pore -Scale Fluid Flow and Reactive Transport,” ACS Omega , vol. 8, no. 15, pp. 13649 –

13669, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1021/acsomega.2c07643. 

[25] X. Shan and H. Chen, “Lattice Boltzmann model for simulating flows with multiple phases and 

compon ents,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 1815 –1819, Mar. 1993, doi: 

10.1103/PhysRevE.47.1815. 

[26] Y. Wang and J. -J. Huang, “Wetting and Spreading Behavior of Axisymmetric Compound 

Droplets on Curved Solid Walls Using Conservative Phase Field Lattice Boltz mann Method,” 

Entropy , vol. 26, no. 2, Art. no. 2, Feb. 2024, doi: 10.3390/e26020172. 

[27] I. Green, “Exact Spectral Moments and Differentiability of the Weierstrass -Mandelbrot Fractal 

Function,” J. Tribol. , vol. 142, no. 4, p. 041501, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1 115/1.4045452. 

[28] M. V. Berry and Z. V. Lewis, “On the Weierstrass -Mandelbrot Fractal Function,” Proc. R. Soc. 

Lond. Ser. Math. Phys. Sci. , vol. 370, no. 1743, pp. 459 –484, 1980. 

[29] Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Ji, L. Wang, and D. Li, “Influence of surface roug hness on the fluid flow in 

microchannel,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser. , vol. 2740, no. 1, p. 012059, Apr. 2024, doi: 10.1088/1742 -

6596/2740/1/012059. 

[30] F. Lalegani, M. R. Saffarian, A. Moradi, and E. Tavousi, “ Effects of different roughness 

elements on friction and pressure drop of laminar flow in microchannels,” Int. J. Numer. 

Methods Heat Fluid Flow , vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1664 –1683, Jul. 2018, doi: 10.1108/HFF -04 -2017 -

0140. 

[31] C. Barnes, A. R. ( आीशर सोनवने ) So nwane, E. C. Sonnenschein, and F. Del Giudice, “Machine 

learning enhanced droplet microfluidics,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 35, no. 9, p. 092003, Sep. 2023, 

doi: 10.1063/5.0163806. 

[32] A. J. Chambost et al. , “Machine learning -based detection of label -free cancer stem -like cell 

fate,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 19066, Nov. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -022 -21822 -z. 

[33] S. Hu et al. , “The new paradigm of computational fluid dynamics: Empowering computational 

fluid dynamics with machine learning,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 37, no. 8, p. 081302, Aug. 2025, doi: 

10.1063/5.0280743. 

[34] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and L. Yang, “Physics -

informed machine learning,” Nat. Rev. Phys. , vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 422 –440, May 2021, doi: 

10.1038/s42254 -021 -00314 -5. 

[35] S. Cai, Z. Wang, S. Wang, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics -Informed Neural 

Networks for Heat Transfer Problems,” J. Heat Transf. , vol. 143, no. 6, p. 060801, Jun. 2021, 

doi: 10.1115/1.4050542. 

[36] H. Chen, E. Kätelhön, and R. G. Compton, “The application of physics -informed neural 

networks to hydrodynamic voltammetry,” Analyst , vol. 147, no. 9, pp. 1881 –1891, 2022, doi: 

10.1039/D2AN00456A. 

[37] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics Informed Deep Learning (Part I): Data -

driven Solutions of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations,” Nov. 28, 2017, arXiv :

arXiv:1711.10561. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1711.10561. 

[38] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Multistep Neural Networks for Data -driven 

Discovery of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems,” Jan. 03, 2018, arXiv : arXiv:1801.01236. 

Accessed: Aug. 13, 2024. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.01236 [39] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics Informed Deep Learning (Part II): 

Data -dr iven Discovery of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations,” Nov. 28, 2017, arXiv :

arXiv:1711.10566. Accessed: Aug. 13, 2024. [Online]. Available: 

http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10566 

[40] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics -informed neura l networks: A deep 

learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial 

differential equations,” J. Comput. Phys. , vol. 378, pp. 686 –707, Feb. 2019, doi: 

10.1016/j.jcp.2018.10.045. 

[41] M. Dreisbach, E. Kiyani, J. Kriegse is, G. Karniadakis, and A. Stroh, “PINNs4Drops: 

Convolutional feature -enhanced physics -informed neural networks for reconstructing two -

phase flows,” Nov. 28, 2024, arXiv : arXiv:2411.15949. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2411.15949. 

[42] N. K. Chaurasia and S. Chakrab orty, “Reconstruction of the turbulent flow field with sparse 

measurements using physics -informed neural network,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 36, no. 8, Aug. 2024, 

doi: 10.1063/5.0218611. 

[43] D. Fan, Y. Xu, H. Wang, and J. Wang, “Comparative assessment for pressu re field 

reconstruction based on physics -informed neural network,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 35, no. 7, Jul. 

2023, doi: 10.1063/5.0157753. 

[44] F. Zhang, J. Chen, Z. Xie, J. Wen, and H. Hu, “Reconstructing high -resolution flow fields from 

low -resolution experimen tal data based on multi -fidelity physics -informed neural network,” 

Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. , vol. 162, p. 112577, Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2025.112577. 

[45] G. S. Meshram, “Quantifying surface wettability in textured surfaces using two -dimension al 

pseudo -potential multiphase lattice Boltzmann model,” J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. , vol. 39, no. 9, 

pp. 1472 –1496, May 2025, doi: 10.1080/01694243.2025.2452861. 

[46] J. S. Lopez -Echeverry, S. Reif -Acherman, and E. Araujo -Lopez, “Peng -Robinson equation of 

sta te: 40 years through cubics,” Fluid Phase Equilibria , vol. 447, pp. 39 –71, Sep. 2017, doi: 

10.1016/j.fluid.2017.05.007. 

[47] M. Raissi and G. E. Karniadakis, “Hidden physics models: Machine learning of nonlinear partial 

differential equations,” J. Comput. Phys. , vol. 357, pp. 125 –141, Mar. 2018, doi: 

10.1016/j.jcp.2017.11.039.