Title: Efficient and Principled Scientific Discovery through Bayesian Optimization: A Tutorial

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.01328v2

Published Time: Mon, 06 Apr 2026 00:47:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 67

Markdown Content:
# EFFICIENT AND PRINCIPLED SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY THROUGH 

# BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION : A T UTORIAL 

Zhongwei Yu 1, Rasul Tutunov 2, †, Alexandre Max Maraval 2, †, Zikai Xie 3, †, Zhenzhi Tan 4, †,Jiankang Wang 5, †, Zijing Li 5, Liangliang Xu 5, Qi Yang 4,6, ‡, Jun Jiang 3, ‡,

Sanzhong Luo 4, ‡, Zhenxiao Guo 5, ‡, Haitham Bou-Ammar 2, ‡, Jun Wang 7, ‡

> 1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 

> 2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 3University of Science and Technology of China 

> 4

Tsinghua University 5The University of Hong Kong 

> 6

Haihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations 7University College London 

Figure 1: A four-panel comic illustrates the conceptual journey of translating human scientific intuition into a for-malised, autonomous discovery framework for identifying a high-performance “ever-light” catalyst. All characters, dialogues, and events depicted in this narrative are entirely fictional and are used solely for illustrative purposes. 

The main characters are Professor Aris (senior researcher), Leo (PhD student), and Sarah (research engineer). The four scenes: (1) The Wall of Infinite Choices highlights the complexity of the chemical search space and the tension between logical certainty and probabilistic exploration; (2) The High Stakes of “Just One More” exposes the “exploita-tion trap” of settling for local optima under resource constraints versus unguided exploration; (3) The “Ghost” in the Machine poses the question of translating uncertainty into actionable instructions for autonomous experimentation; (4) 

The Vision of the Autonomous Lab resolves this tension via Bayesian optimization, where surrogate models quantify uncertainty, acquisition functions balance exploration/exploitation, and autonomous labs navigate the search space efficiently. 

> arXiv:2604.01328v2 [cs.LG] 3 Apr 2026

BO Tutorial 

## ABSTRACT 

Scientific discovery follows a well-established paradigm: researchers hypothesise, experiment, and refine theories based on empirical evidence. Such a cycle has propelled scientific progress for cen-turies, yet this iterative workflow is often implemented intuitively and haphazardly, leading to wasted resources, inefficient experimental design, and missed opportunities to uncover critical insights. To address this, there is a growing need for a principled framework to formalise and automate the sci-entific discovery process. This tutorial presents Bayesian Optimisation (BO), a probability-driven method from computer sci-ence that embodies the very cycle of modern scientific discovery. Through Bayesian modelling of unknown mechanisms, BO formalises the core scientific activities: its surrogate models (e.g., Gaus-sian processes) act as evolving explanation to empirical observation, while its acquisition functions guide the selection of experiments to test these hypotheses. In doing so, BO balances the exploita-tion of existing knowledge with the exploration of uncharted domains, eliminating guesswork and reducing reliance on manual trial-and-error. In this tutorial, we show that scientific discovery is usually associated with objectives and thus, can be framed as optimisation problems. Then, we unpack key building blocks of BO, including surrogate models, Gaussian processes, acquisition functions. Consequently, we present algorithmic workflows and validate BOs efficacy through real-world case studies in catalysis, materials science, organic synthesis, and molecule discovery. In addition, we also address critical technical extensions for scientific applications (e.g., batched experimentation, heteroscedasticity, contextual optimisation, integrating human in the loop), ensuring robustness and adaptability to the constraints of real-world laboratory and computational science. Tailored for a broad scientific audience, this tutorial bridges BO advancements in artificial intel-ligence with practical implementation across natural sciences. It offers tiered content: practical coding examples for experimentalists seeking to accelerate their work; mathematical foundations for researchers developing domain-specific BO methods; and principled insights into uncertainty-aware decision-making for general readers. Ultimately, this tutorial empowers cross-disciplinary researchers to design experiments more efficiently, leading to more principled, accelerated scientific discovery.               

> †Equal contribution. ‡Corresponding authors. Emails by order: zhongwei-yu@outlook.com ,{rasul.tutunov, alexandre.maraval1}@huawei.com ,
> zikaix@ustc.edu.cn ,tzz24@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn ,{wangjiankang, goldenli}@connect.hku.hk ,
> xuliang0826999@gmail.com ,yangqi@hlsct.cn ,jiangj1@ustc.edu.cn ,luosz@tsinghua.edu.cn ,
> zhenxiao.guo@hku.hk ,haitham.ammar@huawei.com ,jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

2Contents 

1 Introduction 4

## I Scientific Discovery as Optimisation Problems 9

2 Optimisation Problems and Algorithms 93 Theoretical Concepts of Optimisation 12 4 Coding an Optimisation Problem 14 5 Case Studies 17 

## II Understanding the Black Box 22 

6 Surrogate Model 22 7 Gaussian Process 25 8 Implementation 29 9 Coding the Surrogate Model 29 

## III Acting and Decision Making 34 

10 Acquisition Function 34 11 Bayesian Decision Theory for Optimisation 36 12 Coding the Acquisition Function 37 

## IV Algorithmic Workflow and Implementation 41 

13 Bayesian Optimisation Algorithm 41 14 The GP-UCB Algorithm and Theoretical Guarantees 43 15 Review of Technical Extensions for Scientific Discovery 45 16 Coding BO Workflows 47 17 Integrating BO with Scientific Tools 52 

## V Demonstrative Experiments and Conclusion 56 

18 Experimental Settings 56 19 Experimental Results 57 20 Discussion 59 21 Conclusion 60 

## Preliminary Note 

In order to help readers navigate the material and quickly identify which parts are most relevant to their background and interests, most sections are tagged by small visual markers (icons). Each marker corresponds to a particular style of content and an intended audience, as described below: • : This section covers fundamental principles, concepts, and summaries. It is designed to be accessible to all readers, featuring elementary mathematics and no complex technical details. • : This section provides technical methodological details, requiring some background in machine learning or statistics. • : This section includes coding instructions and hands-on samples for practical implementation. Readers are expected to be familiar with the basic use of Python. • : This section provides theoretical derivations and analysis, prepared for readers with proper mathematical background and interests in the theoretical rationales. • : This section details experimental results and performance benchmarks. • : This section presents case studies of BO applied to real-world scientific discovery. 3BO Tutorial Demonstrative Discovery (Aristotle)      

> First Principles
> Deduction
> Knowledge
> Inductive Discovery (Bacon)
> Induction Observation
> Experiments Empirical Data Knowledge
> Hypothetico-Deductive Discovery (Newton, Descartes, Mill, ...)
> Design Knowledge
> Observation
> Deduction
> Experiments Empirical Data
> Acceptance
> Hypothesis
> Testing
> Derivation/Projection
> Rejection & Refinement
> (Falsificationism)
> Hypothesis
> Bayesian Hypothetico-Deductive Discovery
> Prior
> Belief
> Probabilistic Projection
> Observation
> Experiments
> Design
> Empirical Data
> Posterior
> Belief
> Predict
> Hypothesis
> Space
> Knowledge
> Summary
> Computational
> Model Bayesian Inference

Figure 2: The illustration of core paradigms of scientific discovery with historical representatives. (i) Demonstrative discovery derives certain knowledge from self-evident first principles through formal logical deduction, independent of empirical observation. (ii) Inductive discovery constructs general laws by systematically accumulating empirical data via controlled experiments, inducing patterns from an evidence base. (iii) Hypothetico-deductive discovery pro-poses tentative hypotheses, derives testable predictions, validates them against empirical data, and refines or rejects the hypotheses through consistency checks. (iv) Bayesian hypothetico-deductive discovery is an emergent mod-ern methodology that quantifies degrees of belief across a hypothesis space and iteratively updates these beliefs via Bayesian inference; the resulting posterior provides both a summary of robust knowledge and guidance for decision-making. 

## 1 Introduction 

At its core, scientific discovery is the systematic acquisition of knowledge regarding the natural world. This process has evolved through a succession of rigorous methodological frameworks [37], as illustrated in Figure 2. In early practice, Aristotelian demonstrative science deduced knowledge from first principles, such as axioms and postulates. Conversely, Francis Bacon pioneered the inductive approach, advocating for the systematic accumulation of empirical observations to reveal nature’s underlying patterns. Later, these deductive and empirical threads were integrated into the Hypothetico-Deductive (H-D) model, in which scientists propose tentative hypotheses and test their logical consequences against experimental evidence. Karl Popper further refined this model by introducing falsificationism, asserting that scientific progress occurs not by proving theories true, but by systematically attempting to prove them false—ensuring that only the most robust explanations survive. These historical methodologies are not merely relics; they constitute the diverse toolkit of modern science. In contem-porary research, different methods are applied at distinct stages of investigation. For instance, the inductive approach has been revitalised by the “Big Data” era, where machine learning identifies patterns in vast datasets. The H-D method remains the gold standard for experimental design, while deductive logic provides the backbone for theoretical deriva-tions and mathematical modelling. Together, these frameworks create a multi-layered approach to understanding complex phenomena. However, scientific discovery is more than a static set of rules; it is a meta-methodology that evolves over time. Kuhn [48] famously argued that science progresses through paradigm shifts rather than steady accumulation. Kuhn distin-guished between two facets of discovery: discovery-that (the initial observation of an anomaly) and discovery-what 

(the subsequent conceptualisation of that anomaly within a coherent theoretical framework) [47, 78]. When “discovery-4BO Tutorial thats” (observations that existing paradigms cannot reconcile) reach a critical mass, the prevailing framework enters a crisis, ultimately leading to a new paradigm that redefines the “discovery-what.” 

1.1 The Bayesianism of Scientific Discovery 

We are currently witnessing a new revolution in scientific methodology: the shift towards Bayesianism [57], which extends the H-D paradigm by explicitly accounting for uncertainty over hypotheses (Figure 2). In modern research, the hypothesis space (i.e., the set of all possible explanations) is often gargantuan or infinite. Because a hypothesis can only be absolutely certain if all competing alternatives are rejected (a rare feat given limited experimental resources), it is seldom feasible to declare a single hypothesis as definitively correct. To address this, the Bayesian H-D method ac-knowledges the inherent uncertainty that experimental evidence can rarely fully eliminate. It treats scientific discovery as the continuous updating of degrees of belief. This shifts the focus from the deterministic claims of the traditional H-D method to an adaptive belief distribution that is refined as new evidence emerges. This distributional view revolutionises experimental design. Since the objective is no longer to validate a single deterministic claim, experimentation instead focuses on the belief dynamics across the entire hypothesis space. While integrating belief over such complex spaces was once computationally intractable, modern technology has made it feasible. Scientists can now embed hypothesis spaces into computational models, representing belief dynamics as computable functions of empirical data. Furthermore, rather than relying solely on human intuition, these models can serve as automated experiment designers. A notable application of this paradigm is Bayesian experimental design 

(BED) [73], where experiments are selected to maximise information gain. Real-world science often extends beyond seeking pure explanations; we also seek knowledge to inform active decision-making. In many cases, scientific discovery is best represented as the optimisation of specific objectives, where the relationship between actions and outcomes must be mapped through active experimentation. In this tutorial, we intro-duce Bayesian optimisation (BO) [82, 26] as the primary methodology for this objective-oriented discovery. While BO shares the H-D and BED focus on exploring hypotheses, it goes further by coupling belief updates with the necessity of making decisions relative to specific goals. 

1.2 A General Workflow for Scientific Discovery with Bayesian Optimisation 

Bayesian Optimisation is an efficient optimisation algorithm originating from computer science. However, rather than being a mere black-box algorithm, it also serves as the modern computational crystallisation of the Bayesian hypothetico-deductive philosophy discussed in Section 1.1. It provides a formal, iterative framework to navigate the gargantuan search spaces of modern science. To understand this workflow conceptually, it is helpful to view it as a cycle between two primary components that mirror the scientific method: a surrogate model and an acquisition function .In the Bayesian framework, the surrogate model , commonly a Gaussian Process (GP), represents our current “state of belief” regarding the natural laws governing the system (e.g., the relationship between a protein sequence and its affinity). Much like the evolving paradigms in the history of science, the surrogate model acts as a probabilistic “digital twin” of the experiment. It does not simply provide a single best guess; it maintains a distribution over all possible outcomes, explicitly quantifying its own uncertainty. In regions where data is scarce, the model acknowledges its lack of knowledge through high variance, capturing the “epistemic uncertainty” that is central to Bayesian epistemology. Guided by this internal model, we use an acquisition function to perform the “deductive” step of the discovery cycle. This component formalises the strategy for the next experiment, deducing which observation will be most informative based on our current beliefs. It balances two fundamental scientific drivers: exploitation (testing hypotheses the model predicts are highly likely to succeed) and exploration (testing hypotheses in unknown regions to challenge and refine the current paradigm). This iterative loop, proposing a hypothesis, testing it against the “oracle” (the real world or a high-fidelity simulation), and updating our beliefs, perfectly mirrors the evolution of scientific knowledge. By using this principled decision rule, BO ensures that every expensive experiment is chosen to provide the maximum possible value, accelerating the objective-directed scientific discovery in a data-efficient manner. Below is a practical and conceptual workflow to integrate BO into scientific discovery: 1. Frame the scientific challenge as an optimisation problem : Start by defining three key components: the 

design space (the experimental parameters you can adjust, e.g., reaction temperature, material composition, or solvent type), constraints (practical limits like safety regulations, resource availability, or biophysical feasibility), and the objective (what you aim to maximise or minimise, e.g., catalytic efficiency, molecular 5BO Tutorial stability, or minimising energy use). This step translates vague scientific questions (“Can we improve this process?”) into concrete targets (“Maximise hydrogen yield while keeping reaction time < 2 hours”). 2. Establish an objective evaluation process : Determine how you will measure the level of success. If real-world experiments are costly or time-consuming, use existing datasets (e.g., from literature or lab records) to train an “oracle”, which serves as a computational stand-in that mimics the outcome of actual experiments. For feasible hands-on work, design an evaluation pipeline compatible with lab equipment or simulations to generate reliable results. 3. Build an initial knowledge base and update mechanism : Your initial “belief” about the problem comes from a surrogate model —a flexible tool that learns from data to represent how design choices relate to out-comes. Kickstart this model with a small set of initial experiments (e.g., random samples across the design space or expert-guided tests) to capture baseline knowledge. The surrogate will then update its beliefs as new data emerges, mirroring how scientific understanding evolves. 4. Define a strategy for selecting next experiments : To avoid haphazard testing, use an acquisition func-tion —a principle to balance two goals: exploring understudied regions (to avoid missing breakthroughs) and exploiting regions the surrogate deems promising (to refine top performers). For simplicity, this step can be streamlined by choosing user-friendly BO software that preconfigures these strategies for scientific use cases. 5. Execute the iterative BO loop : This loop mirrors the classic scientific method but accelerates it with data: (i) use the surrogate to predict outcomes of potential experiments; (ii) select the most valuable experiment (via the acquisition function); (iii) run the experiment or query the oracle; (iv) feed the new result back to update the surrogate. Repeat until your objective is met or resources are exhausted. 6. Synthesise knowledge and actionable results : Conclude by extracting two key outputs: model-based in-sights (from the surrogate, e.g., how temperature influences yield) and optimal experimental conditions (the best design from your history of tests). This dual outcome ensures you gain both practical solutions and a deeper understanding of the system. Crucially, BO is not a one-size-fits-all tool; its components (surrogate, acquisition function) must be tailored to your field: a catalyst design problem may use a surrogate suited to chemical descriptors, while material science might prioritise handling discrete composition constraints. By embedding BO into your existing scientific workflow, you replace guesswork with principled decision-making, accelerating discovery without sacrificing rigour. 

1.3 An Illustrative Example: Antibody Discovery with BO 

To illustrate how BO functions in practice, we consider its application to automated antibody design. The goal is to identify high-affinity protein sequences within an astronomically large combinatorial search space using as few costly evaluations as possible. Through this example, we establish how scientific discovery is framed as an optimisation problem and computerised through the BO framework, as illustrated in Figure 3. We focus on the design of antibodies that bind strongly to a specific antigen. The ability of an antibody to recognise a target is largely determined by the Complementarity-Determining Region 3 of the heavy chain (CDRH3). From a design perspective, we treat an antibody candidate as a sequence of amino acids defining this CDRH3 region. The sci-entific objective is to discover sequences that maximise binding affinity to a target antigen while remaining biologically viable .The challenge is twofold. First, the space of possible sequences is combinatorially explosive; for a typical CDRH3 length, the number of combinations exceeds the number of atoms in the observable universe. Second, evaluating a candidate, whether through wet-lab experiments or high-fidelity simulations, is expensive and time-consuming. We treat this evaluation as a “black-box” oracle: we provide a sequence, and it returns a noisy estimate of binding affinity, without providing any clues about why that sequence worked or how to improve it. This paradigm is instantiated in AntBO [43], a framework designed for real-world antibody discovery. As shown in Figure 3B, AntBO formalises the discovery process into a four-step loop. It begins with an initial dataset (Step 1) and fits a Gaussian Process to represent the current understanding of the sequence-affinity relationship (Step 2). A critical refinement in AntBO is the use of a trust region during the acquisition phase (Step 3). As illustrated in Figure 3A, many mathematically “optimal” sequences might be biologically “unsatisfiable”—for instance, they may have an impossible chemical charge or repetitive patterns that cannot be manufactured. To avoid wasting resources on these “dead ends,” the trust region constrains the search to sequences that are similar to known, developable antibodies. Finally, the suggested sequence is sent to an oracle (Step 4), such as the Absolut! simulator, and the result is fed back into the database to refine the model for the next round. 6BO Tutorial 

Figure 3: The AntBO workflow for automated antibody design (Figure 1 of Khan et al. [43]). (A) Constraints on the search space: Examples of biologically unsatisfiable CDRH3 sequences (e.g., excessive repetition or invalid charge) that the optimiser must learn to avoid. (B) The Bayesian Optimisation loop: (Step 1) Starting from an initial dataset of sequences and their energy/affinity scores; (Step 2) Fitting a Gaussian Process (GP θ ) to model the objective and its uncertainty; (Step 3) Maximising an acquisition function ( αθ ) within a local trust region to propose a candidate x∗

that balances performance and biological plausibility; (Step 4) Evaluating the candidate via a black-box oracle (e.g., the Absolut! simulator) to generate new data and update the model. In experimental trials, AntBO identified high-affinity candidates after evaluating fewer than fifty sequences—a tiny fraction of the billions possible. This demonstrates that by coupling a probabilistic “digital twin” with a strategic decision rule, researchers can bypass the trial-and-error of traditional discovery and move directly toward optimal scientific solutions. 

1.4 Literature Review of Bayesian Optimisation 

Bayesian Optimisation (BO) [26] is a principled approach for searching the global maximum of an expensive-to-evaluate black-box objective function. Its origins lie in early prototypes developed by Kushner [50], Mockus [62], and Zhilinskas [113], with Mockus [62] systematically formalising the Bayesian framework for global optimisation. By the end of the 20th century, Jones, Schonlau, and Welch [42] popularised this methodology through an algorithm termed Efficient Global Optimisation (EGO). A further surge in BO research emerged around 2010, when Srinivas et al. [90, 91] integrated BO with bandit algorithm techniques [2], firmly establishing BO as a distinct subfield within machine learning and black-box optimisation. Bayesian optimisation has been known by several historical names, reflecting the evolution of its theoretical founda-tions and practical applications. Central to its early implementations is Gaussian process regression [85], also referred to as Kriging [45]—a term coined in honour of the South African mining engineer D. G. Krige, who first applied the method in geostatistics. Consequently, BO was also commonly referred to as “Kriging-Based Optimisation” or “Gaussian Process Bandit” in its early stages. Modern BO now encompasses a diverse range of probabilistic surro-gate models and stands as a core paradigm within the broader framework of “ Sequential Model-Based Optimisation ”(SMBO) [40]. In computer science and artificial intelligence (AI), BO has become a cornerstone of automated machine learning (Au-toML) and hyperparameter optimisation (HPO) [88, 5, 15]. It also plays a central role in sequential decision-making formulations (e.g., Gaussian process bandits), with a strong focus on principled algorithm design and theoretical re-gret analysis [90, 91, 98, 10]. Recent advances in the field have emphasised algorithmic improvements [99], including mitigating the curse of dimensionality [19, 32], designing more effective acquisition strategies [79, 105], enhancing robustness to noise [18, 15], and integrating more expressive surrogate models [89, 103, 64, 58]. It was not until the mid-2010s that BO gained traction within the natural sciences. The need to optimise costly and time-consuming experiments made BO a natural choice for automating the search over experimental conditions. A key advantage of BO over heuristic search algorithms lies in its Bayesian modelling framework, which enables it to 7BO Tutorial achieve meaningful results with significantly fewer experimental evaluations. In recent years, BO has been adopted across a diverse range of scientific domains, including chemistry [35, 9, 83, 106] and materials science [60, 56, 53, 84]. Research in these fields typically focuses on tailoring BO to domain-specific challenges, such as structured or constrained design spaces, and on incorporating scientific prior knowledge (e.g., material descriptors) into the optimisation loop [34, 107]. Notably, a critical gap has emerged between the AI and natural science communities in the application and understand-ing of BO. State-of-the-art BO algorithms, such as TuRBO [21] and HEBO [15], are often developed and evaluated primarily on AI-centric tasks like HPO, with limited demonstration of their utility across a wide range of real-world scientific problems. Conversely, practitioners in the natural sciences commonly rely on established, user-friendly software packages [69, 35] or adapt classical BO algorithms, and may not be fully aware of the most recent method-ological advances from the AI literature. This disconnect hinders the translation of cutting-edge BO research into practical scientific progress, limiting the efficiency and impact of automated experimental discovery. This tutorial aims to bridge the gap between AI advances and natural sciences, by presenting BO as a fundamental tool for practitioners with diverse backgrounds. Surprisingly, existing textbook and tutorial resources for BO are insufficiently tailored to this purpose. While several high-quality resources exist—including a systematic and detailed textbook [26], a comprehensive survey [82], and a well-regarded technical tutorial [22]—none are specifically targeted at scientific practitioners, who often have varied technical backgrounds and distinct needs. 

Motivation and Focus of this Tutorial Many scientific researchers do not require deep knowledge of BOs techni-cal intricacies and simply wish to use it as a software tool, while others seek a more thorough understanding of its theoretical foundations. A particular oversight in existing resources is the failure to explain why and how many scien-tific problems can, in essence, be formulated as optimisation problems; indeed, many scientific practitioners remain unaware that their day-to-day research implicitly involves optimisation. Furthermore, existing tutorials provide little to no code-level guidance on implementing BO, leaving practitioners, such as chemists or materials scientists with-out extensive programming experience, unable to apply BO to their own problems without developing software from scratch. To address these critical gaps, this tutorial provides structured case studies, hands-on coding instructions, and content stratified by technical complexity, ensuring that BO is accessible and applicable to all scientific practitioners engaged in automated discovery. 

1.5 Organisation of this Tutorial 

This tutorial is structured into five modular parts: 1. Part I establishes foundational concepts, framing scientific discovery as a black-box optimisation problem, formalising key definitions, and illustrating how real-world scientific challenges map to BO frameworks. It requires only basic scientific literacy and elementary probability knowledge, making it accessible to all readers aiming to grasp why BO is suited to scientific discovery. 2. Part II delves into surrogate models, focusing on Gaussian Processes as the canonical choice for BO, covering kernel design, uncertainty quantification, and hyperparameter adaptation. It includes practical implementa-tions with Scikit-Learn and GPyTorch, targeting readers with foundational machine learning or statistical knowledge to master the core predictive component of BO. 3. Part III explores acquisition functions that balance exploration and exploitation, alongside their theoretical grounding in Bayesian decision theory. It explains both myopic and non-myopic strategies, equipping readers to select and customise decision-making criteria for specific scientific constraints. 4. Part IV delivers complete algorithmic BO implementations (standard and human-in-the-loop) and discusses advanced technical extensions for scientific settings. It also provides coding instruction of BO, using a high-level BO package such as HEBO [15] or basic modelling packages including Scikit-Learn [70] and Gpytorch [25]. It also includes experimental validation against baseline methods to demonstrate BOs sample efficiency. Additionally, we also present an example of how BO synergises with existing scientific tools such as molecule descriptors. Each part contains multiple sections targeted at different readers with diverse backgrounds, from experimental sci-entists seeking actionable tools to method developers pursuing theoretical rigour, with clear learning objectives and flexible navigation paths. 8BO Tutorial 

# Part I 

# Scientific Discovery as Optimisation Problems 

Bayesian optimisation, originally developed in computer science, has become a widely adopted methodology for op-timising black-box functions. A natural question arises: how is optimisation fundamentally related to the process of scientific discovery? Somewhat surprisingly, this connection is both profound and pervasive, yet it is often underap-preciated by practising scientists. In reality, scientific researchers routinely engage in implicit optimisation—manually adjusting experimental conditions, exploring parameter spaces, and seeking optimal settings—without necessarily recognising that these activities are instances of solving optimisation problems over unknown functions. The cogni-tive gap lies in the fact that, during the iterative design and execution of experiments, scientists may not explicitly frame their process within the formalism of optimisation theory. In this part, we systematically elucidate how scientific discovery can be cast as an optimisation problem, specifically in the context of experimental design. By precisely identifying the core optimisation procedures underpinning scientific research, we open the door to leveraging computational tools for automating and accelerating scientific progress. We begin by introducing the foundational elements of optimisation in scientific contexts, catering to readers without prior exposure to optimisation theory. For those interested in a deeper theoretical understanding, we provide a conceptual roadmap for further study. 

## 2 Optimisation Problems and Algorithms 

Optimisation lies at the heart of both scientific inquiry and technological advancement, providing a rigorous mathe-matical framework for systematically identifying the best possible solutions under a given set of circumstances. In the context of scientific discovery, optimisation formalises the process of selecting experimental designs, adjusting parameters, and making decisions that maximise the attainment of desired objectives. This section introduces the formal definition of optimisation problems and discusses how scientific experimentation can be reframed as a process of sequential optimisation, ultimately enabling the automation and acceleration of discovery through computational algorithms. 

2.1 The Definition of Optimisation Problems 

Let x be a variable defined on a domain X . An optimisation problem with respect to x seeks to identify a value x∗ ∈X that maximises (or minimises) a given objective function. The canonical form of an unconstrained optimisation problem is: 

maximise x∈X f (x) (1) where f : X → R is a real-valued objective function defined on the decision (or parameter) space X .In more general scenarios, additional requirements may be imposed on x in the form of constraints, leading to a constrained optimisation problem: 

maximise x∈X f (x)

subject to 

{gi(x) = 0 , i = 1 , . . . , m e

gi(x) ≥ 0, i = me + 1 , . . . , m 

(2) where f : X → R and each gi : X → R are real-valued functions defined on X . The set {gi}me 

> i=1

represents the 

equality constraints , which must be exactly satisfied; {gi}mi=me+1 denotes the inequality constraints , indicating that some criteria should meet or exceed certain thresholds. The feasible set under these constraints is defined as: 

Xg = {x ∈ X | gi(x) = 0 for i = 1 , . . . , m e; gi(x) ≥ 0 for i = me + 1 , . . . , m } . (3) The optimisation problem thus seeks x∗ ∈ X g maximising f (x).

2.2 The Latent Optimisation Problem of Scientific Discovery 

From the era of Baconian induction to the hypothetico-deductive (H-D) paradigm, empirical observation has served as the cornerstone of scientific knowledge acquisition. At its core, scientific experimentation involves selecting an action 9BO Tutorial or design x ∈ X and observing the resultant outcome o ∈ O . The underlying mechanism by which nature produces this observation can be formalised as the (unknown) true model M∗:

o = M∗(x). (4) Scientific inquiry is motivated not only by the desire to understand the world ( explaining ), but also by the need to utilise this understanding to guide action ( doing ). Broadly, there are three hierarchical types of knowledge that scientific discovery aims to uncover: 1. Hypothesis-level knowledge (what ): Identifying the class of plausible hypotheses of M∗ governing the system under study. 2. Explanatory knowledge (why ): Pinpointing which hypothesis of M∗ best explains our experience, i.e., why actions x have produced the observed outcomes o.3. Actionable knowledge (how ): Determining how to choose actions x under M∗ to optimise a reward (or utility) function r(x, o ) : X × O → R, subject to constraints {hi(x, o )}mi=1 (if any). Focusing on the ultimate goal of actionable discovery, the scientific process can be formalised as the following optimi-sation problem: 

maximise x∈X r(x, M∗(x)) 

subject to 

{hi(x, M∗(x)) = 0 , i = 1 , . . . , m e

hi(x, M∗(x)) ≥ 0, i = me + 1 , . . . , m 

(5) By defining f (x) = r(x, M∗(x)) and gi(x) = hi(x, M∗(x)) , we recover the standard constrained optimisation framework (2). Here, the reward function r encodes preferences over design–outcome pairs, such that r(x1, o 1) < r (x2, o 2) if (x2, o 2)

is preferred to (x1, o 1). In the special case where r is constant, the problem reduces to pure explanation-driven discovery—the focus of Bayesian experimental design (BED). This distinction highlights how Bayesian optimisation (BO) extends beyond BED, not only addressing what and why , but also guiding how to act. It is worth noting that, in some cases, one may define the decision space X to coincide with the feasible set Xg induced by the constraints. While this unifies all problems into an unconstrained form, it obscures important distinctions at the hypothesis and explanation levels. In practice, exploring actions beyond the current feasible set can be instrumental in revealing the true nature of M∗. Moreover, constraints gi may themselves depend on the unknown mechanism, so that the feasibility of an action x is not always known a priori .

2.3 Optimisation Challenges for Scientific Discovery 

Scientific discovery, when formulated as an optimisation problem, presents several unique challenges that distinguish it from classical numerical optimisation [68], such as gradient descent or Newton’s method. These challenges include: 

Black-box Objectives and Constraints In scientific discovery, the objective function f (x) = r(x, M∗(x)) is a 

black-box : the mechanism M∗ is unknown and must be inferred from data. Consequently, optimisation must proceed without analytic expressions for the objective or its derivatives. Furthermore, constraints gi(x) may also depend on unknown aspects of M∗, necessitating real-world experimentation to determine feasibility [33]. Scientific discovery thus inherently demands optimisation methods capable of reasoning under epistemic uncertainty and integrating model learning with decision-making. 

Partial Observability and Noisy Evaluation Experimental outcomes are often subject to measurement noise and influenced by latent, unobserved variables. Thus, the evaluation of f (x) is typically noisy. For instance, additive noise may be included when evaluating the objective: 

y = f (x) + ε, (6) where ε denotes stochastic noise that summarizes the influence of variability over experimental outcomes. Effective optimisation algorithms must therefore account for uncertainty in observations and appropriately model the noise structure. 

Expensive Experiments Scientific experiments are frequently costly in terms of time, resources, or materials. For instance, synthesising a new chemical compound, running a clinical trial, or conducting a high-energy physics experi-ment may require substantial investment. As a result, sample efficiency—the ability to identify optimal or near-optimal solutions using as few experiments as possible—is paramount. 10 BO Tutorial 

2.4 Optimisation Algorithms for Scientific Discovery 

In this tutorial, we focus on Bayesian optimisation, a representative approach that exemplifies sequential decision-making and serves as a direct analogue to Bayesian H-D scientific discovery (Section 1.1). Here, we conceptualise the core ideas underlying Bayesian optimisation; further details are provided in subsequent sections of this tutorial. 

2.4.1 Optimisation through Sequential Decision Making 

Given the black-box and noisy nature of scientific experimentation, an analytic optimum is typically intractable. There-fore, a practical optimisation strategy operates in a sequential manner. A sequential optimisation algorithm is defined by a policy π(ˆ x|D ) that, at each iteration, selects the next design ˆx based on the accumulated data D from previous experiments. Typically, D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 records n pairs of experimental designs and observed (possibly noisy) rewards. Additional intermediate observations may also be incorporated into the data if available. Conventional sequential optimisation algorithms, such as those relying on gradient information, are ineffective in the optimisation of scientific discovery due to the absence of analytic derivatives. This motivates the use of gradient-free 

or derivative-free methods. Notably, multi-armed bandit algorithms fall within this class, although they often bypass explicit modelling of the underlying mechanism and instead focus on empirical performance. 

2.4.2 Modelling the Objective 

Conventional bandit algorithms suffer from a key drawback: their exploration is often low-efficiency and somewhat haphazard, which makes them poorly suited for expensive experiments where each evaluation of the objective is costly. To address this, we need methods that explicitly store and update our knowledge about the objective, and then choose actions based on this accumulated knowledge rather than blind or naive exploration. With this idea, sequential model-based optimisation (SMBO) embodies the scientific method by explicitly constructing and updating a model of the unknown mechanism, using this model to guide experimental design and action selection. The SMBO procedure typically comprises three steps: 1. Model selection : Choosing a class of models (e.g., linear models, neural networks) to represent plausible hypotheses for M∗.2. Model fitting : Updating the model parameters based on the data D collected thus far. 3. Decision-making : Selecting the next experimental design based on the current model. This iterative process mirrors the scientific cycle of hypothesis generation ( what ), explanation ( why ), and action ( how ). Bayesian optimisation is the principled Bayesian realisation of SMBO, systematically integrating uncertainty quantifi-cation and decision-theoretic principles. 

2.4.3 Incorporating Model Uncertainty: Bayesianism for Optimisation 

Here, we provide the conceptual idea of Bayesian optimisation (BO), as a pivotal variant of SMBO that aligns with the Bayesianism of scientific discovery. What sets BO apart is its combination of Bayesian inference with the modelling of the unknown objective. Instead of relying on a fixed or deterministic view of the problem, BO builds a flexible, prob-abilistic model of the relationship between choices and outcomes, which aligns with the core principles of Bayesian scientific discovery (Section 1.1). Every time we try a new option and observe the result, we use Bayes rule to update our beliefs about the entire decision space. This approach offers two key advantages: • First, it allows us to use prior knowledge about how different choices might be related: if we learn that one option works well, we can infer that similar options are also likely to be good, even before testing them. This is because BOs model captures the correlation among different choices of experiments, so each new observation not only teaches us about the chosen setting but also influences our beliefs about related alternatives. • Second, BO actively manages uncertainty. When deciding where to search next, it balances between focusing on areas that already look promising and exploring regions where our knowledge is limited but the potential reward could be high. This active learning and exploration strategy helps BO to efficiently navigate even very large or complex decision spaces, often finding the global best solution with far fewer experiments than random guessing or trial-and-error approaches. 11 BO Tutorial Policy  

> Model-Based Policy
> Modelling
> Observation Design
> History Data
> Unknown Function
> Experimental Evaluation

Figure 4: Scientific discovery as sequential model-based optimisation: iteratively updating a model of the unknown mechanism based on experimental data, and using this model to guide the selection of future experiments. In summary, Bayesian optimisation enables us to make the most of every experiment by combining probabilistic reasoning with thoughtful, step-by-step decision-making. By leveraging both what we know and what we have yet to learn, BO offers a practical and effective way to tackle challenging optimisation problems where every trial counts. 

## 3 Theoretical Concepts of Optimisation 

Optimisation theory provides the mathematical underpinnings for systematically identifying the best solution to a problem within a prescribed set of possibilities. In this section, we introduce the fundamental concepts and theoretical results that form the basis of optimisation, with a particular focus on sequential optimisation. We begin by revisiting the definition of a general optimisation problem in Section 2.1. 

Definition 3.1 (Optimisation Problem) . Let X ⊆ Rd denote the decision space and f : X → R a real-valued objective function . The (unconstrained) optimisation problem seeks 

x∗ ∈ arg max  

> x∈X

f (x). (7) If constraints are present, the problem becomes find x∗ ∈ arg max 

> x∈X g

f (x)

where Xg = {x ∈ X | gi(x) = 0 , i = 1 , . . . , m e; gi(x) ≥ 0, i = me + 1 , . . . , m } ,

(8) with gi : X → R representing constraint functions. A central distinction in optimisation theory is that between local and global optimality. In scientific discovery, the ob-jective is produced from an unknown and sophisticated mechanism. Therefore, it may possess multiple local maxima, and identifying the global optimum is substantially more challenging. To formalise these concepts, we introduce the following definitions. 

Definition 3.2 (Global Optimum) . A point x∗ ∈ X g is a global maximiser of f if 

f (x∗) ≥ f (x), ∀x ∈ X g . (9) 

Definition 3.3 (Local Optimum) . A point x† ∈ X g is a local maximiser of f if there exists ϵ > 0 such that 

f (x†) ≥ f (x), ∀x ∈ X g ∩ B(x†, ϵ ), (10) where B(x†, ϵ ) denotes the open ball of radius ϵ centred at x†.12 BO Tutorial For scientific discovery, the objective function f is not known in closed form and can only be evaluated sequentially, often at significant cost. Sequential optimisation algorithms address this by selecting a sequence of query points 

(x1, x 2, . . . , x T ), observing (possibly noisy) outcomes yt = f (xt) + εt, and updating their strategy based on accumu-lated data. To rigorously assess the performance of sequential optimisation algorithms, two key metrics are defined: convergence and regret. 

Definition 3.4 (Convergence) . A sequential optimisation algorithm is said to converge to the global maximiser x∗ if, as the number of iterations T → ∞ , the sequence of iterates (xt) satisfies 

lim   

> T→∞

f (xT ) = f (x∗). (11) 

Definition 3.5 (Regret) . Let x∗ denote the global maximiser of f . The instantaneous regret at iteration t is defined as 

rt := f (x∗) − f (xt). (12) The cumulative regret after T iterations is 

RT := 

> T

∑

> t=1

rt =

> T

∑

> t=1

[f (x∗) − f (xt)] . (13) Low cumulative regret indicates that the algorithm rapidly identifies high-performing solutions, making regret a central criterion in the analysis of sequential optimisation methods. These two notions—convergence and regret—are deeply connected, and understanding their relationship is crucial for evaluating the effectiveness of optimisation algorithms. The following theorem establishes a fundamental link between the convergence of an optimisation algorithm and its cumulative regret. 

Theorem 3.6 (Convergence Implies Vanishing Average Regret) . Suppose a sequential optimisation algorithm pro-duces a sequence (xt)Tt=1 such that lim T →∞ f (xT ) = f (x∗). Then, the average regret vanishes asymptotically: 

lim  

> T→∞

1

T RT = 0 . (14) 

Proof. By definition, rt = f (x∗) − f (xt) ≥ 0 and, by hypothesis, f (xt) → f (x∗) as t → ∞ . Thus, for any ϵ > 0,there exists N such that for all t > N , rt < ϵ . Therefore, 

RT =

> T

∑

> t=1

rt ≤ N · M + ( T − N )ϵ, 

where M = max t≤N rt. Dividing both sides by T and taking the limit T → ∞ , the contribution from the first N

terms vanishes, and we obtain lim T →∞ 1 

> T

RT ≤ ϵ. Since ϵ is arbitrary, the result follows. Conversely, bounded cumulative regret ensures that the algorithm spends most of its iterations near-optimal solutions. This is formalised in the following result. 

Theorem 3.7 (Sublinear Regret Implies Convergence in Average) . Suppose an algorithm achieves sublinear cumula-tive regret, i.e., RT = o(T ) as T → ∞ . Then, the average performance converges to the optimum: 

lim  

> T→∞

1

T

> T

∑

> t=1

f (xt) = f (x∗). (15) 

Proof. By definition, 

1

T

> T

∑

> t=1

f (xt) = f (x∗) − 1

T RT .

If RT = o(T ), then 1 

> T

RT → 0 as T → ∞ , so the average converges to f (x∗).These results provide a rigorous foundation for evaluating and designing sequential optimisation algorithms, particu-larly in the context of scientific discovery, where efficient identification of optimal experimental designs is paramount. Ideally, we expect a sequential optimisation algorithm to achieve sublinear regret. The interplay between regret min-imisation and convergence properties guides both the theoretical analysis and practical implementation of modern optimisation strategies. 13 BO Tutorial 

## 4 Coding an Optimisation Problem 

In this section, we demonstrate how to implement the problem definition of (1) using Python code. We focus on unconstrained optimisation, meaning that the objective function is defined over the entire design space without explicit constraints. Constrained Bayesian optimisation (BO) is a more advanced topic [24, 71] and is beyond the scope of this tutorial. 

4.1 Specifying the Design Space 

Framing scientific discovery as an optimisation problem begins with accurately identifying and representing the design space X —not only mathematically but also in a manner compatible with computational tools. Many BO libraries are designed primarily for hyper-rectangular spaces (i.e., continuous variables bounded within intervals). However, scien-tific applications often involve heterogeneous design spaces containing variables of various types, such as categorical choices, integers, and booleans, which require more flexible representations. For this reason, we use the HEBO library [15] to illustrate how to define a design space that supports multiple vari-able types. This section outlines the common variable types encountered in scientific experiments, providing both their mathematical interpretation and realistic examples from domains such as chemistry and materials science. The following Python snippet demonstrates how to define a design space with eight different variable types using HEBO:  

> 1

import pandas as pd  

> 2

from hebo . design_space . design_space import DesignSpace  

> 34

# Define the design space with diverse variable types  

> 5

space = DesignSpace () . parse ([  

> 6

# Continuous numerical interval ( e . g . , reaction temperature in Celsius )  

> 7

{ ’ name ’: ’ x0 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ num ’ , ’ lb ’: 0 , ’ ub ’: 7} ,  

> 8

# Integer interval ( e . g . , number of catalyst layers )  

> 9

{ ’ name ’: ’ x1 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ int ’ , ’ lb ’: 0 , ’ ub ’: 7} ,  

> 10

# Logarithmically scaled continuous variable ( e . g . , concentration of a reagent ) 

> 11

{ ’ name ’: ’ x2 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ pow ’ , ’ lb ’: 1e -4 , ’ ub ’: 1e -2 , ’ base ’: 10} ,  

> 12

# Categorical variable ( e . g . , choice of solvent )  

> 13

{ ’ name ’: ’ x3 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ cat ’ , ’ categories ’: [ ’a ’ , ’b ’ , ’c ’]} ,  

> 14

# Boolean variable ( e . g . , whether to enable a catalyst )  

> 15

{ ’ name ’: ’ x4 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ bool ’} ,  

> 16

# Logarithmically scaled integer variable ( e . g . , number of molecules )  

> 17

{ ’ name ’: ’ x5 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ pow_int ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 10000 , ’ base ’: 10} ,  

> 18

# Stepped integer variable ( e . g . , time intervals in fixed increments )  

> 19

{ ’ name ’: ’ x6 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ step_int ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 9 , ’ step ’: 2} ,  

> 20

# Integer exponent variable ( e . g . , memory size in powers of two )  

> 21

{ ’ name ’: ’ x7 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ int_exponent ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 1024 , ’ base ’: 2} ,  

> 22

])  

> 23 24

# Sample 10 points from the space  

> 25

samples = space . sample (10)  

> 26

# Sort columns alphabetically for readability  

> 27

samples = samples . reindex ( sorted ( samples . columns ) , axis =1)  

> 28 29

# Display information about the space  

> 30

print ( " Numeric parameters : " , space . numeric_names )  

> 31

print ( " Categorical parameters : " , space . enum_names )  

> 32

print ( " Samples :\ n " , samples ) 

4.1.1 Numeric Variables 

Numeric variables take values from a continuous real interval [a, b ]. They are the most common type in BO frameworks and are suitable for parameters that can be controlled continuously. 

Example 4.1. In a chemical experiment, the reaction temperature (measured in degrees Celsius) can be modelled as a numeric variable:  

> 1

{ ’ name ’: ’ temperature ’ , ’ type ’: ’ num ’ , ’ lb ’: 20 , ’ ub ’: 100} 

14 BO Tutorial 

Logarithmically Scaled Variables When parameters span multiple orders of magnitude, such as concentrations or rate constants, it is often more effective to optimise on a logarithmic scale to ensure balanced exploration across scales. HEBO supports this via the pow type, which internally transforms the variable logarithmically. 

Example 4.2. Consider the reaction rate constant k, which can vary between 10 −5 and 10 −1:          

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ reaction_rate ’ , ’ type ’: ’ pow ’ , ’ lb ’: 1e -5 , ’ ub ’: 1e -1 , ’ base ’: 10}

4.1.2 Integer Variables 

Integer variables represent discrete numerical values within specified bounds, suitable for parameters that must be integral. 

Example 4.3. The number of catalyst layers in a reactor can be represented as:         

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ num_layers ’ , ’ type ’: ’ int ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 10}

Logarithmic Integer Variables For integer variables spanning orders of magnitude, HEBO provides the pow_int 

type, which samples integers on a logarithmic scale. 

Example 4.4. The number of molecules added into a material might range from 10 20 to 10 24 :         

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ num_molecules ’ , ’ type ’: ’ pow_int ’ , ’ lb ’: 10**20 , ’ ub ’: 10**24 , ’ base ’: 10}

Stepped Integer Variables When integer parameters increment in fixed steps (e.g., time intervals of 2 seconds), the 

step_int type allows modelling such discretisation. 

Example 4.5. Time intervals measured in steps of 2 seconds between 1 and 9 seconds:           

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ time_intervals ’ , ’ type ’: ’ step_int ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 9 , ’ step ’: 2}

Integer Exponents HEBO supports variables that are powers of an integer base, useful for parameters such as memory sizes or batch sizes that grow exponentially. 

Example 4.6. Memory size in powers of two, ranging from 20 = 1 to 210 = 1024 :          

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ memory_size ’ , ’ type ’: ’ int_exponent ’ , ’ lb ’: 1 , ’ ub ’: 1024 , ’ base ’: 2}

4.1.3 Binary and Categorical Variables Binary Variables Binary variables take values in {0, 1}, representing boolean decisions such as enabling or dis-abling a catalyst. 

Example 4.7. Whether to use a catalyst in a reaction:     

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ use_catalyst ’ , ’ type ’: ’ bool ’}

Here, use_catalyst = 0 means the catalyst is disabled, and use_catalyst = 1 means it is enabled. 

Categorical Variables Categorical variables represent unordered discrete options, such as solvent choices or catalyst types. Unlike integers, categories have no inherent numeric ordering. 

Example 4.8. Choice of solvent in a reaction:         

> 1{ ’ name ’: ’ solvent ’ , ’ type ’: ’ cat ’ , ’ categories ’: [ ’ Water ’ , ’ Ethanol ’ , ’ Methanol ’ ]}

Distinction from Integers While integers imply an ordered magnitude (e.g., 2 > 1 > 0), categorical variables treat each category as unique and unordered. For example, selecting the number of cooling stages is naturally an integer variable, whereas choosing between solvents is categorical. 15 BO Tutorial 

4.2 Defining and Evaluating the Objective Function 

The objective function f : X → R maps a design or experimental condition x ∈ X to a scalar performance metric. This objective function is typically unknown or expensive to evaluate analytically; instead, it is implicitly defined by interacting with an external system such as laboratory experiments, physical processes, or complex simulations via a software interface. Because the objective function involves real-world evaluations, the implementation of the evaluation function depends on the specific experimental or simulation setup. In HEBO, the objective function is implemented as a Python function that accepts a batch of m design points {xi}mi=1 ⊂ X , typically represented as a pandas DataFrame , and returns a NumPy array of corresponding scalar values y = ( y1, . . . , y m) ∈ Rm. This batch interface enables efficient parallel evaluation, which is common in modern scientific workflows. A general template for such an evaluation function is shown below:  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

import pandas as pd  

> 34

def evaluate ( xs : pd . DataFrame ) -> np . ndarray :  

> 5

" " "  

> 6

Evaluate the objective function f on a batch of design points xs .  

> 78

Parameters :  

> 9

xs ( pd . DataFrame ) : Batch of design points ; each row corresponds to one sample .  

> 10 11

Returns :  

> 12

np . ndarray : Array of objective values , one per input design .  

> 13

" " "  

> 14

ys : np . ndarray  

> 15

# Implementation details depend on the application context :  

> 16

# 1. Translate designs xs into commands for experimental equipment or simulators .  

> 17

# 2. Execute experiments or simulations , possibly in parallel .  

> 18

# 3. Collect and preprocess results to compute ys .  

> 19

...  

> 20

return ys 

Manual Evaluation with User Input In some cases, automatic data acquisition from experiments or simulations may be unavailable. A practical workaround is manual evaluation, where the user performs the experiment for each design point and inputs the observed results via the console. This approach maintains the batch interface required by HEBO while incorporating human-in-the-loop evaluation.  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

import pandas as pd  

> 34

def evaluate ( xs : pd . DataFrame ) -> np . ndarray :  

> 5

ys = np . zeros ( len ( xs ) )  

> 67

for i in range ( len ( xs ) ) :  

> 8

x = xs . iloc [ i ]  

> 9

print ( f " Please perform the experiment with design x =\ n { x }\ n " )  

> 10 11

y = None  

> 12

while y is None :  

> 13

try :  

> 14

y = float ( input ( " Enter the observed result y : " ) )  

> 15

except ValueError :  

> 16

print ( " Invalid input , please enter a numeric value . " )  

> 17 18

ys [ i ] = y 

> 19

return ys 

16 BO Tutorial 

Evaluation Using a Mock Oracle Because real-world evaluations can be costly or time-consuming, it is often beneficial to use a mock oracle during development and testing. A mock oracle is a surrogate function that mimics the behaviour of a true black-box function, typically implemented as a simple analytic expression or a fitted model. This enables rapid iteration, debugging, and validation of the optimisation pipeline without incurring real evaluation costs. For example, consider a design space with one continuous variable and one integer variable:                                                                                            

> 1import numpy as np
> 2import pandas as pd
> 3from hebo . design_space . design_space import DesignSpace
> 45#Define the design space with acontinuous variable x0 and an integer variable x1 .
> 6space =DesignSpace () . parse ([
> 7{ ’ name ’: ’ x0 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ num ’ , ’ lb ’: -3 , ’ ub ’: 3} ,
> 8{ ’ name ’: ’ x1 ’ , ’ type ’: ’ int ’ , ’ lb ’: 0 , ’ ub ’: 5} ,
> 9])
> 10 11 def evaluate ( xs : pd . DataFrame ) -> np . ndarray :
> 12 x0 =xs [ " x0 " ]
> 13 x1 =xs [ " x1 " ]
> 14 #Example oracle combining quadratic , sinusoidal , and linear terms
> 15 ys =x0 **2 +0.5 *np . sin (2 *np . pi *( x1 -0.2) ) +0.25 *x0
> 16 return ys . values #Return as numpy array

More sophisticated mock oracles can be built by fitting regression models to an empirical database, providing realistic proxies for expensive black-box functions (see Section 5). 

## 5 Case Studies 

These case studies illustrate how diverse scientific discovery problems can be formulated as optimisation tasks, each presenting unique challenges such as high-dimensional continuous parameter spaces, simplex design spaces, mixed variable types, and high-dimensional feature representations. Since this tutorial is mainly for demonstrative purposes, we define the optimisation problem mainly with mock oracle evaluation fitted from existing databases, thereby avoid-ing the real-world evaluation cost. However, the principles demonstrated here can also be applied to problems that are evaluated on real-world experiments. Most importantly, through these examples, we see how objective-directed scientific discovery is formulated as an optimisation problem, not only mathematically but also through engineering of practical challenges. This formulation stage is critical for enabling effective application of optimisation techniques by translating complex scientific questions into well-posed mathematical problems amenable to systematic exploration and solution. To provide a preliminary overview of the performance advantages of Bayesian optimisation (BO) for scientific dis-covery tasks, we summarise the final optimisation outcomes across all case studies in Table 1. These results serve as a preview of the efficacy of BO frameworks. We observe that BO consistently outperforms random trials across all tasks, achieving superior objective values with the same fixed experimental budget. A detailed description of the experimental setup, full optimisation trajectories, and in-depth performance analysis is provided in Section 19. Table 1: Preview of final optimisation performance across scientific discovery case studies Case Name Section Total Trials Performance Measure Best Solution Performance (Maximise / Minimise) Random Search BO Photocatalytic HER Catalyst 5.1 200 Regret (minimise) 21.8 9.7 HEA Nanozyme Formulation 5.2 200 Regret (minimise) 244 155 OER Electrocatalyst Design 5.3 200 Overpotential (mV, minimise) 245 219 Buchwald-Hartwig Reaction 5.4 200 Regret (minimise) 47 9.9 Molecular QED Optimisation 5.5 100 QED Score (maximise) 0.881 0.918 

5.1 Catalyst Design for Photocatalytic Water Splitting 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/examples/HER 

17 BO Tutorial We begin with a straightforward optimisation problem in chemistry that aligns well with the BO workflow described above. The challenge is to design efficient catalysts for photocatalytic water splitting [67], a process that produces hydrogen fuel from water using sunlight. The objective is to maximise the hydrogen evolution rate (HER)—the amount of hydrogen generated per unit time. The efficiency of this process is highly sensitive to the catalysts composition, which typically consists of a mixture of several materials in varying proportions. In this example, we aim to discover the proportions of catalyst materials for maximising HER . To formalise this challenge, we need to identify the objective (HER), the design variables (the amounts of each catalyst material), and the space of the design variables. As our first case, we focus on illustrating the fundamental principle of BO, and the problem setting is much simplified compared to practical challenges. Specifically, the catalyst design problem can be expressed mathematically as: 

maximise x1,...,x k HER( x1, x 2, . . . , x k)

w.r.t. design space: xi ∈ [0 , h i], i = 1 , . . . , k. (16) Here, xi denotes the amount of the i-th material, and hi its maximum allowable value. In this example, the design space comprises k = 10 parameters, each corresponding to the concentration or amount of a specific material in the catalyst: L-Cysteine, Acid Red 87, Methylene Blue, NaCl, NaOH, P10-MIX1, Polyvinylpyrroli-done (PVP), Rhodamine B, Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and Sodium silicate . These materials are commonly used in photocatalytic systems and contribute to catalyst activity or stability. For instance, organic dyes such as Acid Red 87, Rhodamine B, and Methylene Blue serve as photosensitisers to extend light absorption. L-Cysteine acts as a sacrificial electron donor, promoting charge separation and hydrogen evolution. NaCl and NaOH regulate ionic strength and pH, which strongly influence performance. Additives like PVP and SDS function as surfactants affecting catalyst particle dispersion and morphology, while sodium silicate may stabilise or structure the catalyst. Proprietary mixtures (e.g., P10-MIX1) can provide additional or synergistic effects tailored to specific systems. For this illustration, each parameter varies continuously within [0 , 5] (in appropriate units), resulting in a ten-dimensional optimisation space. Even if each parameter is discretised coarsely with step size 1, the number of candi-date compositions reaches 610 —an astronomically large search space for exhaustive search. To implement the problem as an optimisation problem, we use the HEBO interface to construct the design space. For this tutorial, we fit a random forest model from an empirical dataset to construct a mock oracle evaluation. 

5.2 High-Entropy Alloy Formulation Optimisation as Nanozymes 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/examples/HEA 

As potent alternatives to natural horseradish peroxidase (HRP), peroxidase (POD)-mimicking nanozymes hold great promise in biomedicine. This example focuses on optimising high-entropy alloy (HEA) nanozymes. The catalytic performance metrics (e.g., Vmax and KM ) of HEAs are nonlinearly influenced by various physicochemical param-eters, including elemental composition, particle size, crystal structure (FCC/BCC/HCP), and surface morphology. Since these micro-features determine the electronic structure and active site exposure, and the parameter space is vast, traditional trial-and-error methods are inefficient. Here, we hope to efficiently explore this space and identify the composition–structure combinations that maximise catalytic efficiency .In this case study, we consider HEAs composed of five distinct metal elements: Co, V, Mn, Cu, and Fe. The goal is to optimise the elemental ratios to maximise Vmax and minimise KM , thereby maximising the overall catalytic efficiency ( E) for the conversion of hydrogen peroxide into hydroxyl radicals. Because the decision variables represent compositional proportions, they are subject to the summation constraint that all ratios sum to 1. Additionally, to ensure the formation of a true five-component HEA, each element is constrained within the range xi ∈ [0 .05 , 0.35] .Consequently, the optimisation problem is formulated as follows: 

maximise xCu ,...,x Co E(xCu , x F e , x M n , x V , x Co )

w.r.t. design space: xCo + xCu + xM n + xF e + xV = 1 ,

0.05 ≤ xi ≤ 0.35 , i ∈ { Co, Cu, M n, F e, V }.

(17) 

Handling Bounded-Simplex Design Space A challenge that impedes direct BO application to this problem is han-dling the simplex space, i.e., the sum of design variables must be 1. As introduced in Section 4, this simplex space is not directly supported by most software. To proceed, we seek to define an equivalent problem to the original problem (17), such that the design spaces of the two problems can be invertibly transformed. More precisely, we can map the 18 BO Tutorial bounded simplex into a hyper-rectangle via an invertible reparameterisation transform ϕ : x ∈ X 7 → z ∈ [0 , 1] 4, such that ϕ(X ) = [0 , 1] 4. Then, the original problem is converted to 

maximise z∈[0 ,1] 4 E(ϕ−1(z)) , (18) which has a rather simple design space as a 4-dimensional hypercube. We refer to Section 5.2.1 as one possible implementation of the mapping ϕ. Given an empirical database, a random forest model or an AutoGluon model is fitted as the mock oracle. 

5.2.1 Reparameterisation Transform of the Bounded Simplex Space 

Consider the original feasible set 

X = {x ∈ Rn | 1⊤x = 1 , l  x  h} ,

where n > 1 and the element-wise bounds satisfy 0  l ≺ h  1. We note that the set X is nonempty if and only if 

> n

∑

> i=1

li ≤ 1 ≤

> n

∑

> i=1

hi.

Below, we derive the desired bijection ϕ, such that ϕ(X ) = [0 , 1] n−1.Define the tail sums for indices k = 1 , . . . , n as 

Lk =

> n

∑

> i=k

li, Hk =

> n

∑

> i=k

hi,

noting that L1 = ∑ni=1 li and H1 = ∑ni=1 hi.To sequentially characterise feasible intervals for each component xk, define the remaining sum before choosing xk as 

Tk = 1 −

> k−1

∑

> i=1

xi, (T1 = 1) .

For k = 1 , . . . , n − 1, the feasible interval for xk that ensures feasibility of the remaining components is 

xk ∈ [ak, b k], where ak = max ( lk, T k − Hk+1 ) , bk = min ( hk, T k − Lk+1 ) .

By construction, these intervals are nonempty under the global feasibility condition. The last component is uniquely determined as 

xn = Tn ∈ [ln, h n].

Forward map ϕ For any x ∈ X , define z = ϕ(x) ∈ Rn−1 by 

zk = xk − ak

bk − ak

, k = 1 , . . . , n − 1.

Since xk ∈ [ak, b k], each zk ∈ [0 , 1] , so ϕ(X ) ⊆ [0 , 1] n−1.

Inverse map ϕ−1 Given z ∈ [0 , 1] n−1, recover x = ϕ−1(z) recursively. Starting with T1 = 1 , for k = 1 , . . . , n − 1

compute: 

ak = max ( lk, T k − Hk+1 ) , bk = min ( hk, T k − Lk+1 ) ,xk = ak + zk(bk − ak), Tk+1 = Tk − xk.

Finally, set xn = Tn.By construction, x ∈ X , and the maps ϕ and ϕ−1 are inverses, establishing a bijection between X and the hypercube 

[0 , 1] n−1. This reparameterisation enables efficient Bayesian Optimisation over the constrained simplex domain by transforming it into a standard hyper-rectangular space. 19 BO Tutorial 

5.3 Catalyst Design for Electrolytic Water Splitting 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/examples/OER 

The urgent need for carbon emission reduction has catalysed global interest in sustainable energy technologies. Among these, hydrogen generation via water electrolysis stands out for its potential to utilise surplus renewable electricity, offering a zero-emission and high-efficiency pathway. Despite its promise, the penetration of green hydrogen remains minimal. The principal bottleneck is economic: green hydrogen production is 2–3 times more costly than conventional methods, primarily due to the high expense and suboptimal efficiency of electrocatalysts employed in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Traditional catalyst discovery relies on empirical intuition and extensive trial-and-error, with a search space exceeding 30 dimensions and combinatorial possibilities in the hundreds of millions. Thus, there is a critical need for efficient, data-driven approaches to accelerate electrocatalyst discovery. The OER process, which governs water electrolysis efficiency, is typically assessed by the overpotential η at a fixed current density (10 mA cm −2). The optimisation task is to minimise η as a function of high-dimensional experimental parameters, formalised as: minimise η = f (x)

where x encompasses both categorical variables (e.g., metal types, support materials) and continuous variables (e.g., annealing temperature, catalyst loading, proton concentration), as well as process parameters such as stirring and washing conditions. 

Multiple-objective Extension Although this is beyond the scope of this tutorial, we would also like to point out some practical concerns in scientific experiments. In practical catalyst development, multiple objectives are involved, such as activity, stability, and cost. The multi-objective optimisation (MOO) problem is formulated as: 

max  

> x∈X

[−η(x), Stability( x), −Cost( x), TOF( x)] .

A simplistic approach is to scalarise the objectives through a weighted sum, so that the problem reverts back to the single-objective case. However, this potentially causes issues because some objectives compete, and assigning proper weights over sub-objectives becomes rather difficult. Therefore, MOO usually seeks to approximate the Pareto frontier, representing solutions where no objective can be improved without compromising others. To approach this, multi-objective BO [112, 4, 109] is a popular research topic, providing more advanced BO tools. 

Evaluation with a Literature-Based Mock Oracle For this case, we curated a comprehensive database of over 1600 OER catalyst records from published literature, capturing essential variables such as precursor types, modification sites, synthesis protocols, and process conditions. Initially, the dataset undergoes rigorous preprocessing, including target standardisation (overpotential at 10 mA cm −2), duplicate and outlier removal (IQR method), categorical value normalisation, and train-test partitioning ( 80% : 20% ). Then, a random forest model is trained for the mock oracle evaluation. Feature importance analysis highlights catalyst loading (14.9%), primary metal amount (11.3%), and annealing temperature (9.0%) as key determinants of OER performance. 

5.4 High-Dimensional Organic Synthesis 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/examples/BH 

Synthetic chemistry is foundational to advances in drug discovery, materials science, and energy research. The discov-ery of novel reactions has historically driven the field forward. Synthetic organic chemistry relies on the systematic discovery of reaction conditions to maximise key outcomes such as yield, enantiomeric excess ( ee ), catalytic effi-ciency (TON/TOF), or cost-effectiveness. However, the combinatorial explosion of possible reagents, solvents, and parameters makes manual trial-and-error approaches inefficient and often biased, especially as modern reaction spaces become increasingly high-dimensional. Traditional paradigms—relying on mechanistic hypotheses, manual trial-and-error, and expert intuition—face critical limitations in efficiency, scalability, and innovation, particularly as reaction spaces become high-dimensional and combinatorially vast [94, 29, 14]. Manual approaches cover only a tiny fraction of possible conditions, leading to low sample efficiency and path dependence. This has contributed to a declining rate of novel reaction discovery despite an increasing number of reported reactions [72, 55, 93]. Overcoming these barriers requires systematic, data-driven methods for exploring complex chemical spaces. In this section, we use the Buchwald–Hartwig (BH) high-throughput experimentation (HTE) dataset to demonstrate the optimisation problem underlying organic synthesis reactions. Torres et al. [96] provides a dataset with 1,728 unique 20 BO Tutorial reaction conditions described by 530 DFT-derived features. At the current stage, we consider the problem of directly finding the best-performing DFT features that lead to the highest yield .1 Therefore, based on this dataset, we frame the optimisation problem as maximise x∈R530 Yield (x) subject to a  x  b,

where a, b ∈ R530 are the lower and upper bounds of the features derived from the dataset, respectively. Above, we present an optimisation problem in a high-dimensional setting. However, jointly optimising over 530 features is impractical for a black-box objective without any prior knowledge of latent structure or gradient informa-tion. High dimensionality is a universal challenge for any black-box optimisation algorithm, as it prohibits effective exploration, especially when scientific experiments are expensive. 

Dimensionality Reduction To overcome the curse of high dimensionality, in this case, we employ simple dimen-sionality reduction techniques to make this optimisation tractable for practical algorithms. In other words, we optimise only the features that have high importance and ignore other unimportant features (e.g., assuming that they are ran-domly set or fixed at average values). To implement this, we first fit a random forest model that naturally extracts feature importance, and then optimise over the top 20 important features. Then, we fit another random forest model using these selected features as the mock objective Yield to be optimised, where the rest of the features contribute to evaluation noise. That is, the optimisation problem becomes maximise xselected Yield (xselected ) subject to aselected  xselected  bselected .

For this reduced problem, we also learn a random forest to behave as the mock oracle, where the ignored variables are incorporated as prediction noise of this oracle. For more advanced solutions to high dimensionality, we refer readers to high-dimensional BO (HDBO) [32], which addresses the challenge by identifying a low-dimensional or sparse latent structure underlying the high-dimensional design space. 

5.5 Discovering the Best-Performing Molecule 

In many scientific domains, optimisation must be performed over non-conventional spaces such as molecules, which are typically represented by discrete, structured objects like SMILES strings rather than standard numerical vectors. This setting poses unique challenges for Bayesian optimisation (BO), since classical surrogate models and acquisition functions are primarily designed for continuous vector spaces and struggle to handle large combinatorial discrete spaces with complex structural constraints. Formally, let X denote the space of valid SMILES strings representing chemically feasible molecules. The optimisa-tion problem can be expressed as 

max  

> x∈X

f (x), (19) where f : X → R is a black-box objective function that assigns a performance score to each molecule x. For example, 

f could be the quantitative estimate of drug-likeness (QED) score [7], which evaluates the drug-like properties of a molecule. Considering all strings satisfying the SMILES syntax is intractable. In practice, it is common to restrict X

to a large but finite subset Xsub ⊂ X extracted from curated databases such as ZINC [41]. The core challenges in this domain are: • Discrete and Structured Decision Space : Unlike continuous vector spaces, molecules are discrete objects with rich structural constraints (e.g., valence, ring closures) that must be respected to ensure chemical validity. • Huge Search Space : The cardinality of X is enormous, making exhaustive search infeasible and requiring highly sample-efficient optimisation strategies. • Leveraging Domain Knowledge : Effective optimisation must incorporate chemical domain knowledge, making use of the key properties inferred from the molecule SMILES strings. 

> 1We note that this setting may not be valid in practice, since we cannot directly control the DFT features but only the reaction conditions. However, in this example we merely aim to illustrate a mathematical latent optimisation problem, without considering these practical constraints. We will leave the direct optimisation in a chemistry space to Section 5.5.

21 BO Tutorial 

# Part II 

# Understanding the Black Box 

As discussed in Part I, we view scientific discovery as a sequential process of optimising an objective function f : X → 

R. This function is an unknown black box, requiring costly real-world evaluations in terms of both resources and time. Consequently, at each step t, the design xt ∈ X must be judiciously selected based on current knowledge of f . To formalise this knowledge, the Sequential Model-Based Optimisation (SMBO) framework employs a surrogate model that approximates f using data from previous trials, Dt−1 := {(xi, y i)}t−1 

> i=1

, where yi ≈ f (xi) is a noisy observation from the i-th experiment. In this part, we address the crucial challenge of how to properly establish such a surrogate model. 

## 6 Surrogate Model 

In the context of black-box optimisation, a surrogate model serves as a computationally efficient proxy for the true objective function f . Instead of directly querying f (which is costly and noisy), we use the surrogate to make predic-tions, guide experimental design, and quantify uncertainty. Figure 5 illustrates how a surrogate model approximates the true objective function (one-dimensional) in black-box optimisation. Conceptually, the surrogate model predicts the objective utilising the noisy observation data, while also quantifying the uncertainty of its prediction. As more ob-servations are incorporated, the surrogates predictions become more accurate and its uncertainty decreases, especially near observed data. This section introduces the fundamental concepts behind surrogate modelling, starting from the definition of the hy-pothesis space, motivating the use of probabilistic models, and culminating in Bayesian inference techniques. These foundations are essential for understanding how sequential model-based optimisation leverages surrogate models to accelerate scientific discovery and decision making. 3 2 1 0 1 2 3            

> x
> 5
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> y
> observations
> true objective
> surrogate
> 3210123
> x
> 5
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> y
> observations
> true objective
> surrogate
> 3210123
> x
> 5
> 4
> 3
> 2
> 1
> 0
> 1
> y
> observations
> true objective
> surrogate

Figure 5: Illustration of surrogate modelling in black-box optimisation. The red curve shows the true objective func-tion, and red dots indicate observed data points that are slightly perturbed from the true objectives. The blue curve represents the surrogate model’s predicted mean, while the shaded region denotes the 95% confidence interval, quan-tifying the model’s uncertainty about the objective. 

6.1 Hypothesis Space 

The first step is to define a space of hypothesized models H (i.e., the hypothesis space) that can approximate the true objective f . As discussed in Part I, experimental evaluations of f are typically noisy, so our hypotheses must also incorporate assumptions about this noise. Mathematically, for a hypothesis h ∈ H , we consider the joint distribution 

p(f(x), y |x, h ), where f(x) denotes the denoised objective value at x. We use the subscript notation (x) to distinguish 

f(x) as a value, in contrast to f (x) as a function. 

Example 6.1 (Linear-Function Hypothesis Space) . Suppose we use a linear model, y = ω⊤ϕ(x)+ ε, where ϕ(x) ∈ Rd

is a feature representation of x and ε is i.i.d. Gaussian noise, N (0 , σ 2). Assuming that σ2 is known in advance, the hypothesis space is then the weight space H = Rd. The joint distribution is 

p(f(x), y |x, ω ) = 

{0, f(x) 6 = ω⊤ϕ(x); 

N (y − f(x) | 0, σ 2), f(x) = ω⊤ϕ(x).

22 BO Tutorial 

Example 6.2 (Parametric Hypothesis Space) . Consider a general parametric function F (x, θ ), where θ are model parameters belonging to a parameter space Θf . The noise ε follows a known distribution pε(ε|x). Then, the hypothesis space is then given by H := Θ , and the joint distribution is 

p(f(x), y |x, θ f , θ ε) = 

{0, f(x) 6 = F (x, θ f ); 

pε(y − f(x)|x), f(x) = F (x, θ f ).

Example 6.3 (Function Hypothesis Space) . Alternatively, we may hypothesize directly over the space of functions 

X → R. Here, each hypothesis h is a function ˜f , with additive noise ε whose distribution pε(ε|x) is known. Con-sequently, the surrogate space is the function space H = RX (the set of functions from the design space X to real numbers R). The Bayesian surrogate model infers ˜f as a random function in the function space RX . The joint distribution is: 

p(f(x), y |x, ˜f , θ ε) = 

{0, f(x) 6 = ˜f (x); 

pε(y − f(x)|x), f(x) = ˜f (x).

The choice of hypothesis space determines both the representational power of the surrogate model and its computa-tional efficiency. Two key considerations should guide the selection of H:• Practicality: The hypothesized models should be computationally tractable with available resources. Fitting and evaluating the surrogate must be much cheaper than evaluating the true objective f . For instance, if each real experiment takes only 30 seconds, it would be impractical to spend several minutes training a deep neural network as the surrogate. • Prior Knowledge: The hypothesis space should reflect any prior knowledge about the true underlying mech-anism M∗ of f . While we may not know the exact mechanism, domain knowledge often provides useful priors (e.g., smoothness). For example, if x, x ′ ∈ X are close, then f (x) and f (x′) are likely to be similar. The hypothesis space should encode such properties. 

6.2 Motivation for Probabilistic Surrogate Models 

A straightforward approach is to select a model h ∈ H that best explains the observed data Dt−1. Formally, 

ˆh = arg min  

> h

L(h; Dt−1),

where L is a loss function. A common choice is the least-squares loss: 

L(h; Dt−1) = 

> t−1

∑

> i=1

(yi − Eh[f(xi)]) 2.

This approach reflects the Hypothetico-Deductive paradigm (see Section 1), where knowledge of the unknown objec-tive is represented by a single hypothesis that best fits the empirical data. However, this deterministic approach has significant limitations: it assumes the true objective f lies within the rep-resentational capacity of H, which is rarely the case. Nature’s mechanisms may be arbitrarily complex, and our hypothesis space can never fully capture all possibilities. Thus, no single hypothesis can be perfectly accepted or rejected based on finite data. This motivates a probabilistic view, as discussed in Section 1.1: our knowledge about f

is better represented as a belief distribution over H. We formalize this as follows: 

Definition 6.4 (Probabilistic Surrogate Model) . A probabilistic surrogate model, denoted M(ˆf |ˆx, D), maps a finite sequence of m designs ˆx ∈ X m—given the dataset D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 of n design-observation pairs—to the joint distribution of their (denoised) objective values ˆf := ( ˆf (ˆ xi)) mi=1 .

6.3 Bayesian Inference of the Surrogate Model 

In this section, we present the statistical rationale underlying surrogate models, establishing the crucial link between Bayesian optimisation and the philosophy of scientific discovery. Some background in probability theory is assumed; see the preliminaries for details. While this section is foundational for understanding the principles of Bayesian Optimisation (BO), it is not strictly necessary for those who only wish to use BO as a software tool. Let x = ( xi)ni=1 ∈ X n and y = ( yi)ni=1 denote the sequences of designs and corresponding observations. Applying Bayes’ rule, we have 

p(h|D ) = p(h, D)

p(D) = p(y|h, x)p(h)

p(y|x) ∝ p(y|h, x)p(h), (20) 23 BO Tutorial where p(y|h, x) marginalises over the latent objective values: 

p(y|h, x) = 

∫

> Rn

p(y, f |h, x) d f .

Thus, the posterior distribution p(h|D ) can be computed from a prior p(h). For a new set of designs ˆx, predictions are made by marginalising over the hypothesis: 

p(ˆf , ˆy|D , ˆx) = ∑

> h∈H

p(ˆf , ˆy|h, ˆx)p(h|D ), (21) or, if H is continuous, by integrating over h. Marginalising out ˆy yields the surrogate model: 

M(ˆf |D , ˆx) = 

∫

> Rm

p(ˆf , ˆy|D , ˆx) dˆ y.

In other words, starting from a prior p(h), the probabilistic surrogate model uses the data D to update our belief to 

p(h|D ), and then uses this posterior to make predictions. For most hypothesis spaces, it is natural to assume the following chain decomposition: 

p(ˆf , ˆy|h, ˆx) = p(ˆ y|h, ˆf , ˆx) p(ˆf |h, ˆx),

which reflects the intuition that observations ˆy are noisy versions of the true objective values ˆf . Therefore, we do not need to explicitly marginalise over ˆy, and the surrogate model can be written as 

M(ˆf |D , ˆx) = ∑

> h∈H

p(ˆf |h, ˆx)p(h|D ), (22) where p(h|D ) is given by Eq. (20). 

Treatment of inference. For certain hypothesis spaces, the surrogate model and all necessary distributions can be computed analytically. For example, Gaussian process regression (see Section 7) provides closed-form solutions for both the posterior and predictive distributions. However, for more general or complex hypothesis spaces, the required integrals and sums are often intractable, necessitating approximate inference methods such as Markov Chain Monte Carlo or variational inference. The details of such approximate inference are beyond the scope of this tutorial. 

6.4 Choices of Surrogate Models 

The choice of surrogate model is central to the success of sequential model-based optimisation. While the Gaussian process (GP) is the most widely adopted surrogate due to its flexibility and analytic tractability, a variety of alternative models have been developed to address specific challenges or leverage domain knowledge. In this section, we provide an overview of the principal surrogate model families, highlighting their key properties, advantages, and limitations. 

Gaussian Processes (GPs). GPs [101] are the canonical surrogate model in Bayesian optimisation, offering a non-parametric, probabilistic approach to function approximation. By placing a prior directly over the space of functions, GPs can flexibly model a wide range of objective functions, and crucially, provide closed-form expressions for the posterior and predictive distributions under Gaussian noise. This analytic tractability enables efficient uncertainty quantification and principled acquisition strategies. Section 7 provides a detailed treatment of GPs, including their mathematical foundations, kernel design, and practical considerations. 

Other Non-Parametric Surrogates. Beyond GPs, other non-parametric models have been proposed. The Student-t

process extends the GP framework by replacing the Gaussian assumption with a heavier-tailed Student-t distribution, offering increased robustness to outliers and model misspecification [81]. The Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) is another popular alternative [6], which models the objective as a density estimation problem, using non-parametric kernel density estimators to model the likelihood of good and bad observations separately. These models can be advantageous when the objective exhibits non-smooth or multi-modal behaviour, or when the noise distribution is non-Gaussian. 

Parametric Surrogates. Parametric models, such as Bayesian linear regression, random forests, and Bayesian neu-ral networks, are also widely used as surrogates [66, 65, 89]. Linear models, possibly with engineered feature embed-dings, are computationally efficient and interpretable, but may lack the expressiveness required for complex objectives. 24 BO Tutorial Bayesian neural networks offer greater representational power, capturing highly non-linear relationships, but typically require approximate inference (e.g., variational methods or Monte Carlo sampling) and are more computationally de-manding. Ensembles of parametric models, such as random forests, while not strictly Bayesian, can provide empirical uncertainty estimates via ensemble variance. In addition, many researchers have also explored how to integrate deep learning with Bayesian inference [54, 95]. 

Pretrained and Data-Driven Surrogates. Using pretrained foundation models as surrogates is an emergent direc-tion in the machine learning community. Large language models [11, 58, 61, 74], prior-data fitted networks [64], and other foundation models can be adapted to serve as surrogates, especially in domains where large, relevant datasets are available. While these models may not strictly adhere to Bayesian principles, they can incorporate vast prior knowledge and provide strong inductive biases, often yielding impressive empirical performance. 

Domain-Specific Surrogates. In many scientific applications, domain knowledge can be encoded directly into the surrogate model. For example, Bayesian networks or physics-informed neural networks can be designed to respect known factors, symmetries, or mechanistic relationships inherent to the problem [17, 38]. Such models can dra-matically improve sample efficiency and interpretability, but require careful construction and validation to ensure consistency with both the data and the underlying scientific principles. 

## 7 Gaussian Process 

In this section, we introduce the Gaussian process (GP) [101], the most widely used surrogate model in Bayesian op-timisation. GPs provide a principled and flexible framework for modelling unknown functions, supporting expressive prior assumptions and enabling analytic Bayesian inference. 

7.1 Foundations and Intuition 

A GP adopts the function-space view of the hypothesis space, placing a prior directly over the set of possible functions 

f : X → R. This prior encodes beliefs about properties such as smoothness, periodicity, and other structural aspects of the objective function. 

Definition 7.1 (Gaussian Process) . Consider a random function f from the domain X to R. We say f satisfies a 

Gaussian process on X , if for any finite subset {x1, . . . , x n} ⊂ X , the joint distribution of (f (x1), . . . , f (xn)) is multivariate Gaussian: 

(f (x1), . . . , f (xn)) ∼ N (m, K),

where m = ( m(x1), . . . , m (xn)) is the mean vector, and K is the n×n covariance matrix with entries Kij = k(xi, x j ).The functions m : X → R and k : X × X → R are called the mean function and kernel function (or covariance function), respectively. We then denote the distribution of the random function f as 

f ∼ GP (m, k )

Intuitively, a GP is a distribution over functions, where the kernel function k(x, x ′) encodes the similarity between points x and x′, and the mean function m(x) encodes prior beliefs about the expected behaviour of f (x). A GP generalises the multivariate Gaussian distribution from finite-dimensional vectors to arbitrary (possibly infinite) index sets X .

7.2 GP as Surrogate Model 

In this section, we describe how GPs are used as surrogate models in Bayesian optimisation. We first present the gen-eral result for conditioning a GP on arbitrary jointly Gaussian variables, and then specialise to the standard regression case with i.i.d. Gaussian observation noise. 

7.2.1 Gaussian Process Conditioned on Gaussian Evidence 

A fundamental property of GPs is that conditioning on any jointly Gaussian random variable yields another GP. More generally, suppose we have a GP prior for f and observe a vector of variables z, which are jointly Gaussian with f

but not necessarily direct noisy observations of f . Let x = ( x1, . . . , x n) and ˆx = (ˆ x1, . . . , ˆxm) be two sets of input 25 BO Tutorial locations. Define 

f = ( f (x1), . . . , f (xn)) ⊤,

ˆf = ( f (ˆ x1), . . . , f (ˆ xm)) ⊤,

z ∼ N (μz , Kzz ),

where z can have arbitrary covariance Kzz and cross-covariance Kˆf z with ˆf .The joint distribution is [z

ˆf

]

∼ N 

([ μz

μ ˆf

]

,

[Kzz Kz ˆf

K ˆf z K ˆf ˆf

]) 

where Kz ˆf and K ˆf z are the mutual covariance matrices. Conditioning on z, the posterior for ˆf is 

ˆf | z ∼ N 

(

μ ˆf + K ˆf z K−1 

> zz

(z − μz ), K ˆf ˆf − K ˆf z K−1 

> zz

Kz ˆf

)

This general result applies to any jointly Gaussian variables. The classical GP regression is a special case, where z are noisy observations of f with i.i.d. Gaussian noise, which is discussed next. 

7.2.2 GP Conditioned on Noisy Observations 

In the standard GP regression setting, we observe noisy measurements y = ( y1, . . . , y n)⊤ at inputs x = ( x1, . . . , x n),where yi = f (xi) + εi and εi ∼ N (0 , σ 2) i.i.d. The joint distribution of observed and predicted function values at new inputs ˆx = (ˆ x1, . . . , ˆxm) is: [y

ˆf

]

∼ N 

([ m

ˆm

]

,

[Kxx + σ2I Kxˆx

Kˆxx Kˆxˆx

]) 

,

where m = ( m(x1), . . . , m (xn)) ⊤, ˆm = ( m(ˆ x1), . . . , m (ˆ xm)) ⊤, and Kxˆx is the n × m matrix with entries k(xi, ˆxj ).Conditioning on the observed data, the posterior predictive distribution for ˆf is: 

ˆf | x, y, ˆx ∼ N (μˆx, Σˆx),

where 

μˆx = ˆ m + Kˆxx [Kxx + σ2I]−1(y − m),

Σˆx = Kˆxˆx − Kˆxx [Kxx + σ2I]−1Kxˆx.

The i.i.d. additive noise assumption is strong but often reasonable in practice. The posterior mean provides the best estimate of the function at new points, while the posterior covariance quantifies uncertainty—crucial for exploration in Bayesian optimisation. 

7.3 Mean Function 

The mean function m(x) encodes prior beliefs about the average value of f (x). Common choices include: • Zero mean: m(x) = 0 . This is the default when no prior information is available. • Constant mean: m(x) = c, where c is a constant hyperparameter. • Linear mean: m(x) = β⊤x, where β is a vector of coefficients. • Linear combination of basis functions: m(x) = ∑ 

> j

βj ϕj (x), where {ϕj } are user-chosen basis functions and βj are coefficients. The parameters of the mean function (e.g., c, β) are treated as hyperparameters. They can be chosen manually or automatically adapted from data (see Section 8.2). 

7.4 Kernel Function 

The kernel function k(x, x ′) encodes assumptions about smoothness, periodicity, and other structural properties of f .It must be symmetric and positive semi-definite to ensure the resulting covariance matrix is valid. 

Definition 7.2 (Positive Semi-Definite Kernel) . A function k : X × X → R is a positive semi-definite (PSD) kernel 

if, for any finite set {x1, . . . , x n} ⊂ X , the matrix K with entries Kij = k(xi, x j ) is symmetric and positive semi-definite, i.e., for any a ∈ Rn, a⊤Ka ≥ 0.26 BO Tutorial 

7.4.1 Basic Choices 

Common kernel functions include: • Squared Exponential (RBF) Kernel: 

k(x, x ′) = σ2 

> f

exp 

(

− ‖x − x′‖2

2ℓ2

)

,

where σ2 

> f

is the signal variance and ℓ is the length-scale. This kernel encodes the assumption that the function is infinitely differentiable (very smooth), and the length-scale controls how quickly correlation decays with distance. • Matern Kernel: 

k(x, x ′) = σ2

> f

21−ν

Γ( ν)

( √2ν‖x − x′‖

ℓ

)ν

Kν

( √2ν‖x − x′‖

ℓ

)

,

where Kν is the modified Bessel function, and ν > 0 is a smoothness parameter. The Matern kernel allows control over the degree of smoothness; e.g., ν = 1 /2 yields the exponential kernel, and as ν → ∞ it approaches the RBF kernel. • Linear Kernel: 

k(x, x ′) = σ2 

> b

+ x⊤x′,

which encodes linear functions and is suitable when the underlying function is expected to be approximately linear. • Periodic Kernel: 

k(x, x ′) = σ2 

> f

exp 

(

− 2 sin 2(π|x − x′|/p )

ℓ2

)

,

where p is the period. This kernel is suitable for modelling periodic functions, such as seasonal effects. Each kernel has associated hyperparameters (e.g., length-scale, variance) that control the behaviour of the GP and are typically learned from data (see Section 8.2). 

7.4.2 Non-Numeric Kernels 

GPs are not limited to numeric data; kernels can be defined for structured or discrete objects, enabling GPs to model complex domains. 

String Kernel String kernels measure the similarity between sequences (such as DNA, RNA, or protein sequences) by counting shared substrings or motifs. For example, the spectrum kernel is defined as 

k(s, t ) = ∑

> u∈A k

#u(s) · #u(t),

where #u(s) is the number of occurrences of substring u of length k in string s, and A is the alphabet. Lodhi et al. [59] introduced efficient algorithms for computing such kernels, enabling GPs to handle high-dimensional sequence data for text classification and bioinformatics. For application of the string kernel in Bayesian optimization, we refer the readers to Moss et al. [63]. 

Fisher Kernel The Fisher kernel leverages a generative probabilistic model p(x|η), with parameters η, to define similarity as 

k(x, x ′) = ∇η log p(x|η0)⊤F −1∇η log p(x′|η0),

where F is the Fisher information matrix and η0 is a reference parameter value. This kernel is suitable when a generative model captures important structure in the data. By specifying the generative probabilistic model p(x|η), the Fisher kernel can handle design spaces consisting of graphs, sequences, or other non-vectorial data, allowing the GP to exploit domain-specific similarity measures. 27 BO Tutorial 

7.4.3 Constructing New Kernels from Base Kernels 

Kernels are closed under addition, multiplication, and scaling, enabling the construction of complex kernels from simpler ones. • Sum: If k1 and k2 are PSD kernels, then k(x, x ′) = k1(x, x ′) + k2(x, x ′) is PSD. This allows the model to capture the additive effects of different features or groups of variables. • Product: If k1 and k2 are PSD, then k(x, x ′) = k1(x, x ′) · k2(x, x ′) is also PSD. This enables modelling interactions between different aspects of the input. • Scaling: k(x, x ′) = c · k1(x, x ′) with c ≥ 0 is PSD. These properties allow practitioners to design kernels that capture multiple aspects of the data, such as periodicity and smoothness, or to encode domain-specific structure. They are crucial for modelling heterogeneous design spaces (e.g., combining categorical and continuous variables), capturing multiple properties (e.g., smoothness and periodicity), or handling high-dimensional spaces by factorizing the kernel across groups of variables. For heterogeneous domains, one can use a product kernel k(x, x ′) = knum (xnum , x ′

> num

) · kcat (xcat , x ′

> cat

), where xnum and xcat denote the nu-meric and categorical components, respectively. For high-dimensional spaces, kernels can be factorized or built as sums/products over groups of features, allowing practitioners to encode prior knowledge about relevant interactions. Some studies also explore the autonomous search of composite kernel structures based on these properties from a series of base kernels [20]. 

7.5 Implementation and Discussion 7.5.1 Complexity Analysis and Approximate Inference 

The primary computational bottleneck is the inversion of the n × n covariance matrix, which scales as O(n3) in time and O(n2) in memory. For sequential data, incremental updates and matrix factorisation techniques (e.g., Cholesky decomposition) can be used to speed up computations. For large datasets, sparse GP approximations or inducing point methods are employed to reduce complexity. Exact inference in GPs is computationally expensive for large n (typically O(n3) time and O(n2) memory). Ap-proximate inference techniques, such as variational inference [36, 97] and sparse GPs [85, 52], typically reduce the computational cost to roughly O(nm 2) time and O(nm ) memory, for some m  n. A detailed discussion of these techniques is beyond the scope of this tutorial. 

7.6 Equivalence to Bayesian Inference of Linear Regression 

Bayesian linear regression with a feature map ϕ(x) and Gaussian prior over weights is equivalent to a GP with kernel 

k(x, x ′) = ϕ(x)⊤Σϕ(x′). Specifically, let y = ω⊤ϕ(x) + ε, with ω ∼ N (0 , Σ) and ε ∼ N (0 , σ 2). The predictive distribution for new inputs is Gaussian, with mean and covariance matching those of a GP with the specified kernel. This equivalence underpins the close relationship between kernel methods and Bayesian linear models, and extends to infinite-width neural networks via the Neural Tangent Kernel. 

Mathematical Derivation Let y = Φ ω + ε, where Φ is the n × d design matrix with Φij = ϕj (xi), ω ∼ N (0 , Σ) ,and ε ∼ N (0 , σ 2I). The marginal distribution of y is 

y ∼ N (0 , ΦΣΦ ⊤ + σ2I)

For a new input ˆx, let ˆϕ = ϕ(ˆ x). The joint distribution of (y, ˆy) is 

[y

ˆy

]

∼ N 

(

0,

[ΦΣΦ ⊤ + σ2I ΦΣ ˆϕ

ˆϕ⊤ΣΦ ⊤ ˆϕ⊤Σ ˆϕ

]) 

By the formula for conditional Gaussians, the predictive distribution for ˆy given y is 

ˆy | y ∼ N 

( ˆϕ⊤ΣΦ ⊤[ΦΣΦ ⊤ + σ2I]−1y, ˆϕ⊤Σ ˆϕ − ˆϕ⊤ΣΦ ⊤[ΦΣΦ ⊤ + σ2I]−1ΦΣ ˆϕ

)

which matches the GP predictive equations with kernel k(x, x ′) = ϕ(x)⊤Σϕ(x′).28 BO Tutorial 

## 8 Implementation 

8.1 Feature Representation 

The effectiveness of surrogate models, particularly parametric ones, often hinges on the choice of feature represen-tation. In scientific domains, domain-specific representations can dramatically improve model performance. For example, in chemistry, molecular graphs can be embedded using graph neural networks, descriptors, or fingerprints; in biology, protein sequences may be represented using sequence embeddings or structural features. The choice of representation should reflect the relevant properties of the domain and the nature of the optimisation task. 

8.2 Hyperparameter Adaptation 

Surrogate models, especially GPs, involve several hyperparameters, including those governing the kernel (e.g., length-scale, variance), the mean function, and the noise model. The choice of hyperparameters significantly affects the surrogate’s predictive accuracy and uncertainty quantification. 

8.2.1 Maximising the Marginal Likelihood 

A principled approach to hyperparameter selection is to maximise the marginal likelihood, which is the probability of the observed data under the model, integrating over the latent function values. For a surrogate model with hyperpa-rameters λ, this means 

λ∗ = arg max  

> λ

p(y | x, λ ) (23) where p(y | x, λ ) is the likelihood of the observed data given the hyperparameters. This approach applies to any surrogate model with hyperparameters. Taking the GP surrogate (see Section 7.2) for example, given observations with i.i.d. additive Gaussian noise, Eq. (23) becomes maximizing: 

log p(y | x, λ ) = − 12 (y − m)⊤(Kxx + σ2I)−1(y − m) − 12 log det (Kxx + σ2I) − n

2 log(2 π),

where n is the dimension (length) of y.

8.2.2 Hierarchical Bayes 

Alternatively, a fully Bayesian treatment places priors over the hyperparameters and integrates them out, yielding a hierarchical model. In the Bayesian framework, the predictive distribution for a new input ˆx is 

p(ˆ y | ˆx, x, y) = 

∫

p(ˆ y | ˆx, x, y, λ ) p(λ | x, y) dλ, 

where p(λ | x, y) is the posterior over hyperparameters. In practice, this integration is often intractable and is approx-imated using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) or variational inference. Hierarchical Bayes provides more robust uncertainty estimates, particularly when data is scarce or hyperparameters are poorly identified. 

## 9 Coding the Surrogate Model 

This section provides a practical introduction to surrogate modelling within Bayesian Optimization (BO) software, focusing on Gaussian Process (GP) models. First, we show how surrogate models are typically implemented and configured in BO frameworks, exemplified by HEBO. Furthermore, we demonstrate how to create and customize Gaussian Process surrogates from scratch using two popular Python libraries. The coding patterns we present are invariant across applications and problem settings, so we do not provide case-by-case studies. 

9.1 Surrogate Modelling in BO Software 

Most BO software naturally employs Gaussian Processes (see Section 7) as surrogate models, where the hyperparam-eters are inferred from the available data. Through the software interface, users can typically configure the surrogate model by passing specific arguments; however, the degree of customization is often limited by the interface design. In the following, we use HEBO as an illustrative example. 29 BO Tutorial                                                        

> 1from hebo . optimizers . hebo import HEBO
> 2from hebo . design_space . design_space import DesignSpace
> 34#Define the design space ( example )
> 5space =DesignSpace () . parse ({
> 6" name " : " x1 " , " type " : " num " , " lb " : 0 , " ub " : 1
> 7})
> 89#Instantiate HEBO with aspecific surrogate model
> 10 opt =HEBO (
> 11 space = space ,
> 12 model_name = " gp " , #Surrogate model name ( default : Gaussian Process )
> 13 model_config ={ " lr " : 0.01 , " num_epochs " : 100} #Configuration for the surrogate .
> 14 )

For the Gaussian Process, which is the default surrogate, HEBO automatically constructs a kernel suitable for hetero-geneous variables. Specifically, it employs a Matern kernel for numeric variables and combines it with appropriate kernels for categorical variables when necessary. Kernel hyperparameters, such as lengthscales, are initialized based on the dataset. This design is practical for most scenarios, offering a robust and flexible surrogate without requiring users to specify detailed configurations. HEBOs GP implementation is powered by GPyTorch [25], which fits kernel and mean function hyperparameters from data. Additionally, HEBO enables users to customize the GP further by passing a dictionary via model_config .For example, one can specify the learning rate ( lr ) and the number of epochs ( num_epochs ) for hyperparameter optimization. Detailed configuration of the GP in HEBO is beyond the scope of this tutorial 2, and the default HEBO settings are generally suitable for most use cases without additional configuration. HEBO also supports a variety of non-GP surrogate models. For instance, rf (Random Forest) is suitable for non-smooth objective functions; deep_ensemble , psgld , and mcbn are neural network-based models designed for prob-abilistic regression [54, 95]. Moreover, HEBO offers specialized models such as gumbel , masked_deep_ensemble ,and fe_deep_ensemble , which incorporate feature selection mechanisms. While this tutorial does not delve into the technical details of these surrogates—topics that require extensive machine learning background—it is useful to acknowledge their existence. This awareness enables users to tackle a broader range of optimization problems beyond the scope of traditional Gaussian Processes. 

9.2 Creating Your Own Gaussian Processes 

The flexibility of surrogate models within BO software is often limited by the interface and typically encapsulated deep within the implementation, making it difficult to inspect or customize. However, it is possible to fully examine, control, and even tailor surrogate modelling. In this section, we demonstrate how to achieve this in Python. Specifically, we introduce two libraries—Scikit-Learn [70] and GPyTorch [25]—to create Gaussian Process surro-gates (see Section 7) for Bayesian optimization. Scikit-Learn is well-suited for small to moderate-sized datasets and rapid prototyping due to its unified interface and ease of use. It abstracts many technical details, allowing researchers to focus on modelling concepts rather than implementation intricacies. Conversely, GPyTorch is designed for scal-ability and customizability. It supports GPU-accelerated inference and training, making it ideal for large-scale or high-dimensional problems. Furthermore, GPyTorch offers fine-grained control over GP architectures, kernel compo-sition, and training procedures, which is essential for advanced research and engineering applications. This flexibility, however, comes with increased complexity and a steeper learning curve. This tutorial serves as an introductory guide, aiming to provide conceptual clarity and practical orientation rather than exhaustive technical coverage. The code examples presented are deliberately minimal and intended for illustration only. Readers with a strong interest in Gaussian Process modelling or those seeking to deploy GPs in production or at scale are encouraged to consult the official documentation and community resources for Scikit-Learn ( https: //scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/gaussian_process.html ) and GPyTorch ( https://gpytorch.ai/ ). Both libraries are actively maintained and offer extensive examples, API references, and tutorials. Replicating such comprehensive material here is neither practical nor desirable; instead, our focus is to introduce fundamental concepts and direct readers to authoritative sources for further study.  

> 2For readers interested in in-depth customization of GP surrogates and possessing relevant coding expertise, we refer to the HEBO source code at https://github.com/huawei-noah/HEBO/tree/master/HEBO/hebo .

30 BO Tutorial 

9.2.1 GP Modelling using Scikit-Learn 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ sklearn.ipynb 

Scikit-Learn provides a user-friendly interface for Gaussian Process regression through the 

GaussianProcessRegressor class. The workflow is streamlined and accessible: users first specify a ker-nel function encoding prior assumptions about the smoothness and structure of the underlying function. The 

GaussianProcessRegressor is then instantiated with the kernel and other relevant parameters, such as noise level. Fitting the model to data is performed via the fit method, which automatically optimizes kernel hyperparameters by maximizing the marginal likelihood. Predictions on new data are made using the predict method, which returns both mean predictions and uncertainty estimates. This design abstracts much of the complexity of GP inference, allowing users to focus on model selection and interpretation rather than implementation details. The interface is consistent with other Scikit-Learn estimators, facilitating integration into broader machine learning workflows. The following example demonstrates fitting a GP to noisy data and making predictions:  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

from sklearn . gaussian_process import GaussianProcessRegressor  

> 3

from sklearn . gaussian_process . kernels import Matern , RBF , ConstantKernel  

> 45

# Generate synthetic training data  

> 6

X_train = np . array ([0.1 , 0.4 , 0.6 , 0.7 , 0.8]) . reshape ( -1 , 1)  

> 7

y_train = np . sin (2 * np . pi * X_train ) . ravel () + np . random . normal (0 , 0.1 , X_train . shape [0])  

> 89

# Define kernel : constant * RBF + Matern ( as an example )  

> 10

kernel = ConstantKernel (1.0) * RBF ( length_scale =0.2) + Matern ( length_scale =0.2 , nu =1.5)  

> 11 12

# Instantiate GP regressor  

> 13

gp = GaussianProcessRegressor ( kernel = kernel , alpha =0.1**2 , n_restarts_optimizer =10)  

> 14 15

# Fit to data  

> 16

gp . fit ( X_train , y_train )  

> 17 18

# Predict at new points  

> 19

X_test = np . linspace (0 , 1 , 100) . reshape ( -1 , 1)  

> 20

y_pred , y_std = gp . predict ( X_test , return_std = True )  

> 21 22

# Plot results ( optional )  

> 23

import matplotlib . pyplot as plt  

> 24

plt . figure ()  

> 25

plt . plot ( X_test , np . sin (2 * np . pi * X_test ) , ’k - - ’ , label = ’ True Function ’)  

> 26

plt . plot ( X_train , y_train , ’ ro ’ , label = ’ Observed ’)  

> 27

plt . plot ( X_test , y_pred , ’b - ’ , label = ’ GP Mean ’)  

> 28

plt . fill_between ( X_test . ravel () , y_pred - 2* y_std , y_pred + 2* y_std , color = ’ blue ’ , alpha =0.2 , label = ’ 95% CI ’)  

> 29

plt . legend ()  

> 30

plt . show () 

Scikit-Learns GP module emphasizes simplicity and consistency. It is highly accessible for beginners, with auto-matic kernel hyperparameter optimization during fitting. The predict method provides both mean predictions and uncertainty estimates. For further details and advanced usage, readers should consult the official documentation at 

https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/gaussian_process.html .

9.2.2 GP Modelling using GPyTorch 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ gpytorch.ipynb 

31 BO Tutorial In contrast, GPyTorch offers a more modular and extensible framework for Gaussian Process modelling, tailored to advanced research and large-scale applications. Built on PyTorch, GPyTorch is particularly well-suited for scalable Gaussian Process modelling, enabling extensive customization of GP architectures. The typical workflow begins by subclassing gpytorch.models.ExactGP to define a custom GP model, specifying mean and covariance (kernel) modules within the constructor. A likelihood object—often a Gaussian likelihood that models observation noise—is instantiated separately and linked to the model. Training proceeds via a manual opti-mization loop: the model and likelihood are set to training mode, and the marginal log likelihood is maximized using an optimizer such as Adam. This loop requires explicit computation of gradients and parameter updates, offering fine-grained control over the learning process. For prediction, the model and likelihood switch to evaluation mode, and the predictive distribution is computed for new inputs. The following example illustrates this basic workflow:  

> 1

import torch  

> 2

import gpytorch  

> 3

import numpy as np  

> 45

# Generate synthetic data  

> 6

X_train = torch . tensor ([0.1 , 0.4 , 0.6 , 0.7 , 0.8]) . unsqueeze ( -1)  

> 7

y_train = torch . sin (2 * np . pi * X_train ) . squeeze () + 0.1 * torch . randn ( X_train . size (0) )  

> 89

# Define GP model  

> 10

class GPModel ( gpytorch . models . ExactGP ) :  

> 11

def __init__ ( self , train_x , train_y , likelihood ) :  

> 12

super () . __init__ ( train_x , train_y , likelihood )  

> 13

self . mean_module = gpytorch . means . ConstantMean ()  

> 14

self . covar_module = gpytorch . kernels . ScaleKernel (  

> 15

gpytorch . kernels . RBFKernel ()  

> 16

) 

> 17

def forward ( self , x ) :  

> 18

mean_x = self . mean_module ( x )  

> 19

covar_x = self . covar_module ( x )  

> 20

return gpytorch . distributions . MultivariateNormal ( mean_x , covar_x )  

> 21 22

# Instantiate likelihood and model  

> 23

likelihood = gpytorch . likelihoods . GaussianLikelihood ()  

> 24

model = GPModel ( X_train , y_train , likelihood )  

> 25 26

# Training loop  

> 27

model . train ()  

> 28

likelihood . train ()  

> 29

optimizer = torch . optim . Adam ( model . parameters () , lr =0.1)  

> 30

mll = gpytorch . mlls . Exact MarginalLogLikelihood ( likelihood , model )  

> 31 32

for i in range (100) :  

> 33

optimizer . zero_grad ()  

> 34

output = model ( X_train )  

> 35

loss = - mll ( output , y_train )  

> 36

loss . backward ()  

> 37

optimizer . step ()  

> 38 39

# Switch to eval mode for prediction  

> 40

model . eval ()  

> 41

likelihood . eval ()  

> 42

X_test = torch . linspace (0 , 1 , 100) . unsqueeze ( -1)  

> 43

with torch . no_grad () , gpytorch . settings . fast_pred_var () :  

> 44

pred = model ( X_test )  

> 45

y_pred = pred . mean  

> 46

y_std = pred . stddev  

> 47 48

# Plot results ( optional )  

> 49

import matplotlib . pyplot as plt  

> 50

plt . figure ()  

> 51

plt . plot ( X_train . numpy () , y_train . numpy () , ’ ro ’ , label = ’ Observed ’)  

> 52

plt . plot ( X_test . numpy () , y_pred . numpy () , ’b - ’ , label = ’ GP Mean ’) 

32 BO Tutorial  

> 53

plt . plot ( X_test . numpy () , np . sin (2 * np . pi * X_test . numpy () ) , ’k - - ’ , label = ’ True Function ’)  

> 54

plt . fill_between ( X_test . numpy () . ravel () ,  

> 55

( y_pred - 2* y_std ) . numpy () ,  

> 56

( y_pred + 2* y_std ) . numpy () ,  

> 57

color = ’ blue ’ , alpha =0.2 , label = ’ 95% CI ’)  

> 58

plt . legend ()  

> 59

plt . show () 

This approach allows extensive customization, including GPU acceleration, approximate inference, and bespoke kernels. It presumes familiarity with PyTorchs computational model and is best suited for readers with an en-gineering or machine learning background. For comprehensive guidance, refer to the official documentation at 

https://gpytorch.ai/ .33 BO Tutorial 

# Part III 

# Acting and Decision Making 

The concept of decision making can be viewed as a mapping from knowledge to action. In the context of scientific discovery, decision making translates our current beliefs about a hypothesis into actions—specifically, the selection of subsequent experiments. The overarching aim is to acquire more knowledge about the unknown and to achieve higher objective values. In sequential optimisation, this process is formalised as a policy π, which maps the accumulated data Dt to the design 

xt+1 ∈ X for the next experiment. For both sequential model-based optimisation (SMBO) and Bayesian Optimisation (BO), this policy π determines the next action using the posterior model M(ˆf |ˆx, Dt). In the sections that follow, we explore the concepts, theoretical foundations, and coding implementations that underlie the construction of such a policy within the BO framework. 

## 10 Acquisition Function 

Given a surrogate model for the unknown objective f : X → R, we now turn our attention to the crucial aspect of decision making: namely, given the current model M(ˆf |ˆx, Dt), how should we select the next design xt+1 ? To address this question, BO reframes decision making as the optimisation of a tractable, white-box function known as the acquisition function .

10.1 Motivation and Definition 

Experiments aimed at efficient discovery must be designed according to sound principles. The central idea of BO aligns closely with the Bayesian philosophy of scientific discovery discussed in Section 1.1: experiments should be designed not only by leveraging our current knowledge, but also by acknowledging and incorporating the uncertainty arising from our ignorance [26]. In this context, the acquisition function acts as a principled criterion for evaluating the potential utility of each candidate point, quantifying the expected benefit of evaluating the objective at that point given the current surrogate model and observed data. It provides a systematic approach to selecting the next experi-ment, inherently balancing the trade-off between exploration (gathering information in poorly understood regions) and 

exploitation (focusing on regions likely to yield high objective values). 

Definition 10.1 (Acquisition Function) . The acquisition function, denoted α(x|D ), is a known function that can be efficiently computed from the surrogate model and the current data D. It assigns a score to each candidate point 

x ∈ X , reflecting the expected benefit of evaluating f (x) given the current knowledge. Given the acquisition function, the decision-making process becomes the maximisation of the acquisition function: 

xt+1 = arg max  

> x∈X

α(x|D t) (24) The acquisition function is constructed upon the surrogate model and is designed to be much less computationally demanding than evaluating the true objective function. In practice, this means that the computational cost associated with optimising the acquisition function is negligible compared to the expense of conducting real experiments. As a result, the process of decision making—i.e., maximising the acquisition function—is far more tractable than directly optimising the costly, black-box objective. In essence, by maximising the acquisition function, we transform the complex problem of experimental design into a manageable optimisation task. Furthermore, this approach is firmly grounded in the principles of Bayesian decision theory, which we discuss in greater detail in Section 11. 

10.2 Trading off Exploration and Exploitation 

A distinguishing feature of Bayesian Optimisation is that the surrogate model M provides not only predictions but also uncertainty estimates, as a result of Bayesian inference. This uncertainty can be strategically exploited to actively explore the unknown objective function. In this setting, decision making must strike a careful balance between two competing objectives: exploration , which involves sampling points where the model is uncertain in order to reduce uncertainty and potentially discover superior solutions; and exploitation , which involves sampling points where the model predicts high objective values, thereby seeking to improve performance based on current knowledge. The acquisition function is specifically designed to mediate this exploration–exploitation trade-off. Its mathematical form typically incorporates both the predicted mean and the uncertainty (variance) of the surrogate model at each 34 BO Tutorial candidate point. By doing so, the acquisition function encourages sampling in regions that are either highly promising (exploitation) or highly uncertain (exploration). This dual focus enables BO to efficiently optimise the unknown objective by judiciously allocating experimental resources. 

10.3 Common Choices of Acquisition Functions 1 2   

> 1
> 2
> 3
> -1
> -1
> u123
> 1
> 2
> 3
> -1
> -1
> u
> ReLU(u)
> 00-2
> (u)

Figure 6: ReLU (u) & I(u) Maximising each of these functions implies encouraging their internal expressions to be positive. In the case of the Heaviside function, this corresponds to driving the argument above zero to trigger a non-zero response. For the ReLU function, the goal is to make the argument as large and positive as possible to maximise the acquisition value. Common choices of acquisition functions in Bayesian optimisation encode different strategies for balancing explo-ration of uncertain regions and exploitation of promising areas suggested by the surrogate model. Popular choices include Probability of Improvement (PI), which prioritises regions likely to outperform the current best; Expected Improvement (EI), which accounts for both probability and magnitude of improvement; and Upper Confidence Bound (UCB), which explicitly trades off mean prediction and uncertainty. More recent criteria, such as information-theoretic acquisition functions [100], are not included in this tutorial. Figure 7 illustrates typical shapes of these acquisition functions over a one-dimensional input space. 

Expected Improvement (EI) The expected improvement has been one of the most commonly used acquisition functions since the early works of Mockus [62] and Jones, Schonlau, and Welch [42]: 

αEI (x | D ) = Ef ∼M (·|· ,D)

[ReLU (f (x) − f (x+))] ,

where x+ is the best performing design in the data so far. The ReLU function is defined as ReLU( u) = max {0, u }

and is illustrated in Figure 6. Here, the subscript f ∼ M (· | · , D) indicates that the evaluation of f complies with the posterior surrogate M(ˆf |ˆx, D) given data D.

Probability of Improvement (PI) PI is another classic acquisition function, first introduced by Kushner [50]: 

αPI (x | D ) = Ef ∼M (·|· ,D)

[I (f (x) − f (x+))] ,

where I(u) is the left-continuous Heaviside step function, 

I(u) = 

{0 if u ≤ 0,

1 if u > 0.

PI measures the probability that sampling at x will yield an improvement over the current best observation f (x+).While intuitive and straightforward, PI can be overly exploitative unless an improvement threshold is introduced. 

Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) UCB is a canonical acquisition function inspired by multi-armed bandit problems [2, 51]: 

αUCB (x | D ) = μ(x) + β σ (x),

where μ(x) and σ(x) are the posterior mean and standard deviation of f (x), which are estimated from the surrogate model at x. The parameter β > 0 controls the trade-off between exploration and exploitation: larger values of β

encourage more exploration, while smaller values favour exploitation. UCB is appealing for its simplicity and strong theoretical guarantees in certain settings. 35 BO Tutorial 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                

> x
> 1.5
> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> y
> GP Surrogate
> True Function
> Observed
> GP Mean
> 95% CI
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> x
> 0.75
> 0.50
> 0.25
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> 1.25
> Acquisition
> UCB
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> x
> 0.00
> 0.05
> 0.10
> 0.15
> 0.20
> 0.25
> Acquisition
> Expected Improvement
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> x
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Acquisition
> Probability of Improvement

Figure 7: Visualization of the Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate model and acquisition functions used in Bayesian Optimization. The true objective function, f (x) = sin(2 πx ), is shown as a dashed black line. Observed data points are marked as red circles, where the Gaussian noise satisfies N (0 , 0.12). The GP surrogate model is depicted as the blue curve (mean prediction), with the shaded region representing the 95% confidence interval ( μ ± 2σ). The acquisition functions—Upper Confidence Bound (UCB), Expected Improvement (EI), and Probability of Improvement (PI)—are plotted in green, blue, and red, respectively, to illustrate their behaviour in guiding the selection of the next evaluation point. We do not plot Thompson Sampling as it is randomly drawn from the posterior surrogate. 

Thompson Sampling (TS) Thompson Sampling [76] is an alternative acquisition strategy rooted in bandit algo-rithms. At each iteration, one samples a function f from the posterior surrogate model, and selects the maximiser: 

αTS (x | D ) = f (x), f ∼ M (· | · , D).

Thompson Sampling inherently balances exploration and exploitation by sampling according to the model’s current uncertainty. Its conceptual simplicity and strong theoretical guarantees make it attractive, especially in parallel or distributed settings. It is important to note that the above acquisition functions are myopic —they consider only the next decision based on the current estimation of the objective, without anticipating the outcomes of future experiments. In reality, the current decision can influence subsequent decisions; thus, it may be desirable to consider the long-term effects of actions. However, Bayesian Optimisation typically employs these myopic acquisition functions, as they have been found to be sufficiently effective and computationally efficient in practice. The rationale is that the surrogate model is itself an approximation of the true objective, so the cost of overly precise planning—predicting long-term effects given an approximate model—often outweighs the potential benefit. Nonetheless, non-myopic acquisition functions can be valuable in certain scenarios, particularly when the experimental budget is extremely limited (i.e., when only a very small number of trials are possible). For a more general and principled perspective on acquisition functions and decision making, we provide a theoretical discussion in Section 11. 

## 11 Bayesian Decision Theory for Optimisation 

This section provides the theoretical motivation and justification for the acquisition function. 

11.1 Utility and Bayesian Decision Making 

Given the entire optimisation history Dt := {(xi, y i)}ti=1 , we define the utility as a function of the s-step look-ahead, 

u(Dt+s). For example, a typical utility is the best objective value ever observed after s additional experiments: 

u(Dt+s) := max  

> t+1 ≤i≤t+s

yi − max  

> 1≤i≤t

yi.

Other possible utility functions may also consider the reduction in model uncertainty (information gain), which is the basis for Bayesian Experimental Design (BED) [73]. Since our aim here is to elucidate the mathematical foundation of acquisition functions, we do not cover the advanced design of utility functions in this tutorial. Bayesian decision making, given the model, requires us to choose xt+1 so as to maximise the expected posterior utility: 

xt+1 = arg max  

> x∈X

E[u(Dt+s)|D t, x ] (25) This formulation makes explicit that future experiments are involved and must be predicted using the current model, taking into account both future model adaptation and the subsequent policy. In other words, the optimal decision 36 BO Tutorial at each step depends on the expected outcomes of all future decisions and the evolution of the model as new data are collected. This recursive dependency is a hallmark of sequential decision making and highlights the complexity inherent in optimal experimental design. 

11.2 From Utility to Acquisition Function 

From Eq. 25, we see that decision making is, at its core, the optimisation of a function, which we denote as 

α(x|D t) := E[u(Dt+s)|D t, x ].

This function serves as the acquisition function, encapsulating the expected utility of each possible next action. Thus, the acquisition function is not arbitrary, but is directly motivated by the principle of maximising expected utility in Bayesian decision theory. Moreover, each commonly used acquisition function can be understood as an implicit treatment of a particular choice of utility function, i.e., a concrete way of quantifying the value of future data or decisions. 

Myopic Acquisition Function If the step look-ahead is s = 1 , the acquisition function simplifies significantly, as it considers only the immediate effect of the next experiment. This leads to the so-called “myopic” acquisition functions, which are widely used in practice due to their computational tractability. Myopic acquisition functions do not require explicit modelling of future decisions or model updates beyond the next experiment, making them both practical and efficient. 

Non-myopic Acquisition Function If the look-ahead s > 1, the acquisition function becomes substantially more challenging to compute, as it involves predicting future observations, updating the model, and accounting for sub-sequent decision-making behaviour. While non-myopic acquisition functions offer the potential advantage of more globally optimal planning [111], their implementation is often computationally intractable, even for a two-step look-ahead [104]. Various approximate methods have been proposed (e.g., [92, 30]), but these approaches are seldom used in practice due to their complexity and high computational cost. Nonetheless, in scenarios with extremely limited experimental budgets, non-myopic strategies may offer significant benefits by allowing more informed and farsighted planning. 

## 12 Coding the Acquisition Function 

12.1 Specifying Acquisition Functions in BO Software 

The acquisition function (AF) plays a central role in Bayesian Optimisation (BO) algorithms, as it determines the strategy by which the next evaluation points are selected. In practical software implementations, the choice of acqui-sition function is typically encapsulated within the optimiser interface, and may be set either by default or explicitly by the user. For example, in the HEBO framework, the acquisition function is selected automatically according to the optimiser class, but can also be customised by specifying the acquisition class and its configuration.                                                         

> 1from hebo . optimizers . bo import BO
> 2from hebo . optimizers . hebo import HEBO
> 34#Construct your DesignSpace ( replace with actual space construction )
> 5space =... #e . g . DesignSpace () . parse (...)
> 67#BO : uses the default acquisition ( LCB , lower confidence bound , for minimisation )
> 8opt_bo =BO ( space )
> 910 #HEBO : high - level optimizer ; by default uses MACE , amulti - objective synthesis of EI , PI , and LCB
> 11 opt_hebo =HEBO ( space )

The HEBO package also supports customisation of the acquisition function. HEBO supports a variety of acquisition functions, each corresponding to a different strategy for balancing exploration and exploitation. The main acquisition classes available in hebo.acquisitions.acq are as follows: • LCB (Lower Confidence Bound): This is the minimisation-oriented version of the popular UCB acquisition (see Section 10.3). In HEBO, LCB is defined as μ(x) − κσ (x), where μ(x) and σ(x) are the predictive mean and standard deviation at x, and κ is a trade-off parameter. This encourages exploration of uncertain regions while seeking low objective values. 37 BO Tutorial • Mean : Selects points with the lowest predicted mean, i.e., pure exploitation without consideration of uncer-tainty. • Sigma : Selects points with the highest predictive uncertainty, i.e., pure exploration. • EI (Expected Improvement): Measures the expected improvement (see Section 10.3) over the current best observation, balancing exploitation and exploration in a principled manner. • logEI : The logarithm of the expected improvement, which can be more numerically stable in some cases. • WEI and Log_WEI : Weighted expected improvement and its logarithmic variant, which can be used for multi-objective or constrained settings. • MES (Max-value Entropy Search): Focuses on reducing the uncertainty about the location of the global mini-mum [100]. • MOMeanSigmaLCB : A multi-objective acquisition that considers mean, standard deviation, and LCB jointly. • MACE : The default in HEBO, this is a multi-objective acquisition function that synthesises several canonical criteria (EI, PI, LCB) into a unified acquisition, thus balancing multiple exploration–exploitation strategies. It is important to note that in HEBO, all acquisition functions are implemented for minimisation tasks. For example, 

LCB is the lower confidence bound, as opposed to the upper confidence bound more commonly used for maximisation. The following code demonstrates how to instantiate HEBO or BO with explicit acquisition classes, including canonical single-objective functions such as EI, and the multi-objective MACE:                                                                                            

> 1from hebo . optimizers . bo import BO
> 2from hebo . optimizers . hebo import HEBO
> 3from hebo . acquisitions . acq import LCB , Mean , Sigma , EI , MACE , GeneralAcq
> 45space =... #your DesignSpace
> 67#1) Use LCB ( lower confidence bound ) with acustom kappa value for exploration -exploitation balance
> 8opt_bo_lcb =BO ( space , acq_cls = LCB , acq_conf ={ ’ kappa ’: 3.0})
> 910 #2) Use Mean ( pure exploitation ) or Sigma ( pure exploration )
> 11 opt_bo_mean =BO ( space , acq_cls = Mean )
> 12 opt_bo_sigma =BO ( space , acq_cls = Sigma )
> 13 14 #3) Use Expected Improvement ( EI ) , acanonical acquisition function
> 15 opt_bo_ei =BO ( space , acq_cls = EI )
> 16 17 #4) Use MACE , the multi - objective synthesis acquisition ( default for HEBO )
> 18 opt_hebo_mace =HEBO ( space , acq_cls = MACE )

12.2 Implementing Acquisition Functions from Your Surrogate Models 

In this section, we demonstrate how to implement common acquisition functions—Expected Improvement (EI), Proba-bility of Improvement (PI), and Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)—using the Gaussian Process surrogates constructed in Section 9.2. These acquisition functions are popular to Bayesian optimisation, as discussed mathematically in Sec-tion 10.3. The code examples below build directly on the GP implementations using Scikit-Learn and GPyTorch; thus, we focus on the acquisition function logic, referencing the surrogate model code as needed. 

12.2.1 Acquisition Functions for Scikit-Learn Gaussian Process 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ sklearn.ipynb 

Given a fitted GaussianProcessRegressor , the posterior mean μ(x) and standard deviation σ(x) at candidate points 

x can be obtained using the predict method with return_std=True . The following code implements UCB, EI, and PI as Python functions, which can be evaluated at any candidate points: 38 BO Tutorial  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

from scipy . stats import norm  

> 34

def acq_ucb (x , gp , beta =2.0) :  

> 5

" " " Upper Confidence Bound acquisition . " " "  

> 6

mu , std = gp . predict (x , return_std = True )  

> 7

return mu + beta * std  

> 89

def acq_ei (x , gp , y_best , xi =0.0) :  

> 10

" " " Expected Improvement acquisition . " " "  

> 11

mu , std = gp . predict (x , return_std = True )  

> 12

std = std . reshape ( -1)  

> 13

mu = mu . reshape ( -1)  

> 14

with np . errstate ( divide = ’ warn ’) :  

> 15

imp = mu - y_best - xi  

> 16

Z = imp / std  

> 17

ei = imp * norm . cdf ( Z ) + std * norm . pdf ( Z )  

> 18

ei [ std == 0.0] = 0.0  

> 19

return ei  

> 20 21

def acq_pi (x , gp , y_best , xi =0.0) :  

> 22

" " " Probability of Improvement acquisition . " " "  

> 23

mu , std = gp . predict (x , return_std = True )  

> 24

std = std . reshape ( -1)  

> 25

mu = mu . reshape ( -1)  

> 26

with np . errstate ( divide = ’ warn ’) :  

> 27

Z = ( mu - y_best - xi ) / std  

> 28

pi = norm . cdf ( Z )  

> 29

pi [ std == 0.0] = 0.0  

> 30

return pi 

The parameter y_best should be set to the best (e.g., lowest) observed value so far, consistent with a minimisation objective. The optional parameter xi controls the improvement threshold for EI/PI, and beta controls the exploration-exploitation trade-off for UCB. 

12.2.2 Acquisition Functions for GPyTorch Gaussian Process 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ gpytorch.ipynb 

For GPyTorch models, the workflow is analogous: after switching the model and likelihood to evaluation mode, the predictive mean and variance are computed for candidate points. The acquisition functions can then be implemented as follows:  

> 1

import torch  

> 2

from scipy . stats import norm  

> 34

def acq_ucb_torch (x , model , beta =2.0) :  

> 5

" " " UCB for GPyTorch ( x should be torch tensor , shape [N , D ]) . " " "  

> 6

model . eval ()  

> 7

with torch . no_grad () :  

> 8

pred = model ( x )  

> 9

mu = pred . mean  

> 10

std = pred . stddev  

> 11

return mu + beta * std  

> 12 13

def acq_ei_torch (x , model , y_best , xi =0.0) :  

> 14

" " " EI for GPyTorch ( returns numpy array ) . " " "  

> 15

model . eval ()  

> 16

with torch . no_grad () :  

> 17

pred = model ( x )  

> 18

mu = pred . mean . cpu () . numpy ()  

> 19

std = pred . stddev . cpu () . numpy ()  

> 20

imp = mu - y_best - xi 

39 BO Tutorial  

> 21

with np . errstate ( divide = ’ warn ’) :  

> 22

Z = imp / std  

> 23

ei = imp * norm . cdf ( Z ) + std * norm . pdf ( Z )  

> 24

ei [ std == 0.0] = 0.0  

> 25

return ei  

> 26 27

def acq_pi_torch (x , model , y_best , xi =0.0) :  

> 28

" " " PI for GPyTorch ( returns numpy array ) . " " "  

> 29

model . eval ()  

> 30

with torch . no_grad () :  

> 31

pred = model ( x )  

> 32

mu = pred . mean . cpu () . numpy ()  

> 33

std = pred . stddev . cpu () . numpy ()  

> 34

with np . errstate ( divide = ’ warn ’) :  

> 35

Z = ( mu - y_best - xi ) / std  

> 36

pi = norm . cdf ( Z )  

> 37

pi [ std == 0.0] = 0.0  

> 38

return pi 

These implementations are fully compatible with the GPyTorch workflow introduced previously. Note that candidate points x should be supplied as PyTorch tensors, and the acquisition values can be used for selection or visualisation as required. 40 BO Tutorial 

# Part IV 

# Algorithmic Workflow and Implementation 

This part is dedicated to a systematic exposition of the workflow, implementation, and practical extensions of Bayesian Optimisation (BO), building upon the foundational concepts established in earlier sections: specifically, the framing of scientific discovery as a black-box optimisation problem, the design and use of surrogate models, and sequential decision-making via acquisition functions. The organisation of this part follows a logical progression from core algorithmic principles to real-world scientific applications. First, we present a compact yet comprehensive overview of the elementary BO workflow, detailing its iterative loop and key considerations for each sub-module. Next, we focus on the canonical GP-UCB algorithm—a widely studied instantiation of BO—and formalise its theoretical guarantees (i.e., sub-linear regret). Subsequently, we address the distinctive challenges of BO in scientific discovery by reviewing technical extensions tailored to real experimental settings. We then translate these concepts into actionable code, providing implementations using state-of-the-art BO libraries (e.g., HEBO) as well as custom workflows built from scratch with Gaussian process frameworks (Scikit-Learn and GPyTorch). Finally, we experimentally validate the efficacy of BO on four representative scientific-discovery tasks spanning catalysis, materials science, and organic synthesis. 

## 13 Bayesian Optimisation Algorithm 

Here, we present a compact description of the basic BO workflow. The algorithm receives an optimisation problem, including the objective domain (i.e., the design space) and an objective evaluator (e.g., manual experimentation or an external interface), and returns the best solution found. We first introduce the overall workflow and then discuss key considerations for the involved sub-modules. 

13.1 Algorithmic Workflow 

The Bayesian optimisation workflow proceeds as follows. The algorithm begins by selecting a set of initial observa-tions to construct an initial dataset. At each iteration, the surrogate model is updated with all available data, and the acquisition function is constructed based on the surrogates predictions and associated uncertainties. The acquisition function is then maximised to propose the next candidate point, which is subsequently evaluated using the true objec-tive function (e.g., through experiment or simulation). The new observation is added to the dataset, and this process repeats until a stopping criterion is met. Finally, the algorithm recommends a solution based on the accumulated data and/or the surrogate model. This workflow is summarised in Algorithm 1, and the main optimisation loop is illustrated in Figure 8. 

Algorithm 1 Bayesian Optimisation (Basic) 

Require: Design space X , objective evaluator evaluate( f, x )

1: Choose a finite subset xinit = ( x1, . . . , x n_init ) ⊂ X for initial observations .

2: Evaluate yinit ← evaluate( f, xinit )

3: Construct dataset D ← { (xi, y i)}n_init i=1 

4: repeat 

5: Fit surrogate model M(ˆf |ˆx, D) from data D

6: Construct acquisition function α(x | D ) from D and the surrogate M(ˆf |ˆx, D)

7: Select the next point by maximising the acquisition function : x′ ← arg max x∈X α(x | D )

8: Evaluate the objective function: y′ ← evaluate( f, x ′)

9: Augment data: D ← D ∪ { (x′, y ′)}

10: until Stopping criteria are satisfied 

11: Recommended final solution x∗ from D and M(ˆf |ˆx, D).

12: return x∗

It is important to note that the above describes the basic version of Bayesian optimisation. Numerous extensions exist that modify this workflow, such as batched or parallel acquisition (selecting multiple points per iteration), human-in-the-loop interaction (where humans guide or modify the search), or the use of more sophisticated surrogate models 41 BO Tutorial Choose the next point: 

> Observations:
> Fit the model:
> Evaluate new input
> & add it to observations:
> Observed inputs:
> Observed outputs:
> Repeat

Figure 8: Bayesian Optimisation Loop: At round N , a surrogate model (e.g., a Gaussian process) is fitted to the observed data points ( {xt, y t}Nt=1 ). The next point xN +1 is selected by optimising an acquisition function derived from the model posterior. The new observation yN +1 is then evaluated and added to the dataset, iteratively refining the model. The solid brown line depicts the mean prediction of the model, while the dashed lines illustrate the associated variance at each input point x.and acquisition strategies. These extensions can further enhance the efficiency and flexibility of Bayesian optimisation in various applications. 

13.2 Consideration of Sub-Modules 

The BO workflow described above comprises several key sub-modules [39]. The two central components—the sur-rogate model and the acquisition function—have been introduced in Part II and Part III. In addition, several auxiliary sub-modules are essential for a complete BO implementation, as outlined below. 

The strategy for choosing initial observations Before entering the main optimisation loop, it is necessary to ini-tialise the dataset with a set of initial observations. This is because the surrogate model requires data to build its initial estimate of the objective function. While it is theoretically possible to start with an empty dataset if the surrogate model has a well-defined prior, this is uncommon in practice. Typically, initial observations are collected to better inform the model and avoid poor early decisions. The simplest strategy is to randomly sample a small number of points from the design space (e.g., uniform sampling). More sophisticated approaches include space-filling designs [42], such as Latin hypercube sampling, which aim to cover the design space more evenly. Alternatively, expert or human suggestions can be used to select initial points, especially when prior knowledge about promising regions is available. 

The maximisation tool for the acquisition function At each iteration, the acquisition function must be maximised to determine the next point to evaluate—this is often referred to as the inner optimisation problem [102]. The choice of maximisation method depends on the nature of the design space. For small, finite spaces, exhaustive search is feasible and guarantees the optimal value. For low-dimensional continuous spaces, discretising the space into a finite grid can be effective. When the acquisition function is differentiable (as is the case with certain surrogates), gradient-based numerical optimisation methods [68] (often with multiple restarts to improve global search) can efficiently locate maxima. For more complex or mixed-variable spaces (e.g., combinations of discrete and continuous variables) or for 42 BO Tutorial multi-objective acquisition, heuristic search methods such as evolutionary algorithms or random search are commonly employed [15]. 

The stopping criteria The optimisation process must be terminated at an appropriate point, and various stopping criteria can be applied. The simplest and most widely-used approach is to specify a fixed budget, such as a maxi-mum number of iterations or function evaluations. More sophisticated criteria can be designed based on the observed data, the surrogate model, or the acquisition function. For instance, a data-based criterion might monitor the empir-ical improvement over recent steps and halt if the improvement falls below a threshold, indicating convergence. A model-based criterion could measure the surrogate models uncertainty and stop when the model becomes sufficiently confident. Acquisition-based criteria might terminate the loop if the maximum value of the acquisition function drops below a certain threshold, signalling diminishing returns. In more advanced settings, the decision of whether to con-tinue can itself be formalised using Bayesian decision theory [16]. 

The final recommendation Upon termination of the optimisation loop, the algorithm must recommend a final so-lution. The most common approach is to select the best observed point in the data (i.e., the input with the highest or lowest observed objective value, depending on the task). Alternatively, the surrogate model can be used to predict the optimum (e.g., the input with the best predicted mean), which may be beneficial if the observations are noisy or sparse. 

## 14 The GP-UCB Algorithm and Theoretical Guarantees 

In this section, we present a canonical and widely studied instance of the Bayesian Optimisation (BO) algorithm: 

GP-UCB . This algorithm employs a Gaussian process (GP) as the surrogate model (see Section 7) and the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) as the acquisition function (see Section 10.3). GP-UCB is not only a standard baseline in practice, but also the subject of extensive theoretical analysis, providing strong regret guarantees for BO [91]. We first describe the algorithm and its implementation, then summarise its theoretical guarantees. 

14.1 GP-UCB Algorithm 

The GP-UCB algorithm assumes that the black-box objective function f (x) is drawn from a Gaussian process prior with mean function m(x) and covariance function k(x, x ′), and that observations are corrupted by independent, iden-tically distributed (i.i.d.) Gaussian noise. That is, for each query xt, we observe yt = f (xt) + ϵt with ϵt ∼ N (0 , σ 2).Given a history of decisions x = (x1, . . . , x t) and their corresponding (possibly noisy) observations y =(y1, . . . , y t)⊤, the posterior predictive distribution for a new candidate ˆx is 

M( ˆf |ˆx; x, y) = N (m(ˆ x) + kˆxx[Kxx + σ2I]−1(y − m), k (ˆ x, ˆx) − kˆxx[Kxx + σ2I]−1kxˆx

) , (26) where: • kˆxx = [ k(ˆ x, x 1), . . . , k (ˆ x, x t)] is the row vector of covariances between ˆx and observed points, and kxˆx is its transpose. • Kxx is the t × t covariance matrix with [Kxx ]ij = k(xi, x j ),• m = [ m(x1), . . . , m (xt)] ⊤.The posterior mean and variance are thus: 

μ(ˆ x|x, y) = m(ˆ x) + kˆxx[Kxx + σ2I]−1(y − m) (27) 

σ2(ˆ x|x, y) = k(ˆ x, ˆx) − kˆxx[Kxx + σ2I]−1kxˆx (28) The core idea of GP-UCB is to select, at each iteration, the next point by maximising an upper confidence bound constructed from the GP posterior: 

αβt (ˆ x|x, y) := μ(ˆ x|x, y) + √βt σ2(ˆ x|x, y), (29) where βt ≥ 0 is an exploration coefficient, which may be fixed or adapted over time. This acquisition function encourages exploration of uncertain regions (via the posterior standard deviation) and exploitation of regions with high predicted mean. A basic version of the GP-UCB algorithm is summarised in Algorithm 2. The algorithm is typically initialised with an empty dataset (or a small set of initial observations) and proceeds for a fixed budget T of iterations, with a dynamically chosen βt.43 BO Tutorial 

Algorithm 2 GP-UCB Algorithm 

Require: Input space X ⊆ Rd; prior mean function m (often m ≡ 0), covariance function k, noise variance σ2;confidence sequence {βt}t≥1; budget T 

> 1:

Initialize data D0 = ∅ 

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . , T do  

> 3:

Compute posterior mean μ(ˆ x|x, y) and variance σ2(ˆ x|x, y) using Equations (27) and (28)  

> 4:

Select xt = arg max ˆx∈X 

(

μ(ˆ x|x, y) + √βt σ2(ˆ x|x, y)

) 

> 5:

Observe yt = f (xt) + ϵt, with ϵt ∼ N (0 , σ 2) 

> 6:

Update data: x ← (x1, . . . , x t), y ← (y1, . . . , y t)⊤ 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

return The best observed x∗ = arg max xi∈x yi

14.2 Theoretical Guarantee: Regret Bounds 

To assess the performance of BO algorithms, the cumulative regret RT over T steps is a common measure (see Section 3). For GP-UCB, strong theoretical guarantees are available: under mild conditions, the cumulative regret grows sublinearly with T , meaning that the average regret per step vanishes as T increases. This implies that GP-UCB efficiently identifies near-optimal solutions as more function evaluations are performed. The regret analysis for GP-UCB is based on information-theoretic arguments. The following two theorems summarise the main results for (i) finite and (ii) compact continuous design spaces. The full derivation is established by Srinivas et al. [91] and is not included in this tutorial. 

Theorem 14.1 (Regret Bound for Finite Design Spaces) . Let X be a finite set with cardinality |X | < ∞. Suppose 

f ∼ GP (m, k ) and fix confidence level δ ∈ (0 , 1) . Define 

βt = 2 log 

( |X | t2π2

6δ

)

.

Then, with probability at least 1 − δ, the cumulative regret of GP-UCB satisfies 

RT ≤ √C1T β T γT ∀T ≥ 1,

where C1 = 8log(1+ σ−2) and γT is the maximum information gain after T steps. 

Theorem 14.2 (Regret Bound for Compact Design Spaces) . Let X ⊆ [0 , r ]d be compact and convex, and suppose 

f ∼ GP (m, k ) with k possessing continuous fourth-order derivatives. For confidence δ ∈ (0 , 1) , set 

βt = 2 log 

( t22π2

3δ

)

+ 2 d log 

(

t2dbr √log(4 da/δ )

)

,

where a, b > 0 are constants from the smoothness condition 

P

{

sup 

> x∈X

∣∣∣∣

∂f ∂x j

∣∣∣∣ > L 

}

≤ ae −(L/b )2

, j = 1 , . . . , d. 

Then, with probability at least 1 − δ,

RT ≤ √C1T β T γT + 2 ∀T ≥ 1,

where C1 is as in Theorem 14.1 and γT is the maximum information gain. 

Theorems 14.1 and 14.2 show that, with high probability, the cumulative regret RT of GP-UCB grows at most as 

O(√T β T γT ). The information-gain term γT depends on the kernel k and the complexity of the underlying function 

f . For commonly used kernels (e.g., squared exponential), γT grows sublinearly with T , so the average regret per step 

RT /T → 0 as T → ∞ . This establishes that GP-UCB is no-regret : the algorithm eventually identifies near-optimal solutions, and the search becomes increasingly efficient over time. The choice of the exploration parameter βt plays a crucial role: it must be large enough to ensure sufficient exploration (and thus guarantee the regret bounds), but not so large as to excessively prioritise exploration over exploitation. The theoretically derived schedules for βt (as above) are sufficient for regret guarantees, but in practice, βt is often treated as a tunable hyperparameter and may be set heuristically or via cross-validation. In summary, GP-UCB provides both a practical and theoretically justified approach to Bayesian Optimisation, bal-ancing exploration and exploitation in a principled manner and enjoying strong guarantees on its optimisation perfor-mance. 44 BO Tutorial 

## 15 Review of Technical Extensions for Scientific Discovery 

Optimisation problems encountered in scientific discovery are often characterised by diverse challenges, rendering the implementation of Bayesian Optimisation (BO) indirect and non-trivial. In this section, we review technical extensions that are particularly valuable for scientific discovery, focusing on batched decision making, handling heteroscedasticity and non-stationarity, contextual decision making, and integrating human expertise within the optimisation loop. 

15.1 Batched Decision Making for High-Throughput Experiments 

In numerous scientific and engineering applications, evaluating multiple candidate designs in parallel is feasible and, in many cases, desirable. This scenario—referred to as batched or parallel Bayesian optimisation—naturally arises in high-throughput experimental platforms. By selecting a batch of q points to evaluate in each round, rather than a single point, one can utilise available resources more efficiently and accelerate the overall optimisation process. The central challenge in batched Bayesian optimisation is to select a set of q candidates, {xt, 1, . . . , x t,q }, that col-lectively offer maximal value for the optimisation objective. Ideally, the batch should strike a balance between (i) exploiting the current surrogate model to sample promising candidates, and (ii) exploring uncertain regions to im-prove the global model. Moreover, the batch should avoid redundant or highly correlated points, ensuring that each experiment yields complementary information. 

Batched Acquisition Functions A natural approach is to develop a batched acquisition function α(ˆ x|D ) for an arbitrary batch ˆx = (ˆ x1, . . . , ˆxq ) ∈ X q of q decision points. Extending standard acquisition functions to the batched setting is, however, non-trivial, as the value of evaluating a set of points jointly is not, in general, the sum of their individual acquisition values. For instance, the q-Expected Improvement (q-EI) [28, 27] generalises the standard expected improvement to batches by considering the expected improvement from the best value among the q new observations, taking into account their joint distribution under the GP posterior. Nevertheless, q-EI becomes intractable for q > 2 and typically requires approximate inference [12]. Other notable batched acquisition functions include the 

parallel knowledge gradient [105] and batched entropy search [80], which directly account for the information gain or expected utility from evaluating a set of points together. These approaches are generally more computationally demanding than their sequential counterparts, but can yield more informative batches. 

Batching via Acquisition Maximisation Alternatively, batching can be achieved by employing a single-point ac-quisition function, where batching is implemented through maximisation of the acquisition function. One practical approach is to generate a batch by optimising the acquisition function multiple times, each time conditioning on the pending (fantasised) outcomes of previous batch members [88, 31]. Recent methods, such as HEBO [15], use population-based optimisers (e.g., evolutionary algorithms) to maximise the acquisition function over the input space, naturally producing a diverse set of high-acquisition candidates. This approach is particularly well-suited to high-dimensional or mixed-value design spaces. 

15.2 Heteroscedasticity and Non-Stationarity 

Traditional BO often assumes simple i.i.d. Gaussian noise and a stationary covariance for uncertainty estimation, particularly when using a Gaussian process surrogate function. These assumptions are known as homoscedasticity and 

stationarity .

Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Homoscedasticity denotes that the noise variance in the observations is constant across all input locations. Formally, if yi = f (xi) + ϵi, then Var[ ϵi] = σ2 for all i, where σ2 is a constant. In contrast, heteroscedasticity refers to the case where the noise variance depends on the input, i.e., Var[ ϵi] = σ2(xi).This implies that some regions of the input space are observed with more (or less) noise than others. 

Stationary and Non-Stationary Covariance Functions A kernel or covariance function k(x, x ′) is termed station-ary if it depends solely on the difference between its inputs, i.e., x − x′. This suggests that the statistical properties of the process (such as smoothness or variability) are uniform throughout the input space. Conversely, if the kernel de-pends on the absolute location or exhibits properties that vary across the input space, it is described as non-stationary .In actual scientific experiments, the assumptions of homoscedasticity and stationarity are often violated. Heteroscedas-ticity is common; for example, measurement noise may increase at the boundaries of an instruments range, or depend on the quality of the sample being measured. Non-stationarity frequently arises when the underlying system exhibits different behaviours in various regions of the input space—such as phase transitions in materials, or abrupt changes 45 BO Tutorial in biological response. Neglecting these phenomena can result in inaccurate uncertainty estimates and suboptimal decisions in Bayesian optimisation. HEBO [15] is a state-of-the-art BO algorithm that systematically addresses heteroscedasticity and non-stationarity. HEBO incorporates concepts from warped Gaussian processes [86], where output transformations help capture com-plex noise structures. Specifically, HEBO applies well-established output transformations such as Box-Cox [8] and Yeo-Johnson [110], together with the Kumaraswamy input transformation [49], achieving an effective balance between ease of implementation and strong empirical performance. 

15.3 Contextual Decision Making 

In many real-world scientific experiments, not all factors influencing the outcome can be directly controlled by the experimenter. Some variables—such as environmental conditions, operator effects, or batch-to-batch variability—may be observed but not manipulated. This scenario is captured by contextual black-box optimisation .

Definition 15.1 (Contextual Optimisation Problem) . Suppose the objective function depends on two sets of variables: controllable design variables x ∈ X , and uncontrollable but observable context variables c ∈ C . The aim is to find, for each context c, a design x that maximises (or minimises) the contextual objective function f (x, c ):

x∗(c) = arg max  

> x∈X

f (x, c ).

In practice, c is revealed at the time of decision-making, and the experimenter chooses x accordingly. Contextual optimisation naturally arises in scientific discovery. For example, in materials science, ambient temperature or humidity (context) may fluctuate and affect measurements, but only the synthesis parameters (design) can be set. In biology, patient-specific factors or cell line differences may be observed but not controlled. Properly accounting for such contextual information enables more robust and adaptive experimental strategies. The general solution to contextual Bayesian optimisation is straightforward: Given context c, one first establishes the contextual surrogate model M(ˆf |ˆx, c, D) and then constructs the contextual acquisition function α(ˆ x|D , c ) based on this model. Krause and Ong [44] provides a theoretical analysis of such contextual extensions to GP-UCB, referred to as CGP-UCB, where C denotes “contextual”. In this approach, a Gaussian process is fitted directly on the joint space of design-context pairs and then used as the surrogate model by fixing the context. Recently, Williams and Rasmussen [101] sought to better model the complex synergy between context and decision by aggregating the outputs of a multi-output Gaussian process (MOGP) over X , where the weights of outputs are produced from the context via a neural network. 

15.4 Integrating Human Expertise in the Optimisation Loop 

In many scientific domains, expert knowledge is crucial for guiding experimental design and interpretation. While it is, in principle, possible to encode such expert knowledge into the BO framework—through surrogate model architecture, prior distributions, or initialisation strategies—practical implementation can be extremely challenging and usually requires a strong background in Machine Learning and Statistics. Expert intuition is often tacit, context-dependent, or difficult to formalise mathematically. Consequently, fully automated BO may fail to leverage valuable human insights, or may make decisions that the domain expert finds implausible or untrustworthy. In real-world discovery, “full automation” may not be a necessity. Instead, it is often reasonable to allow human experts to intervene directly in the optimisation loop [46]. This approach maintains scientific trust and harnesses domain expertise flexibly, without requiring all knowledge to be pre-engineered into the algorithm. There are several ways to integrate human intervention into the BO process. One straightforward approach is to allow the expert to override or reject the candidate design suggested by the algorithm at each iteration. Alternatively, the acquisition function can propose a batch of promising candidates, from which the expert selects the most appropriate one according to their own preferences [77]. Human intervention can be applied at every iteration, only when the model’s uncertainty is high, or when the acquisition function is very flat and multiple candidates are equally plausible. This flexibility allows the optimisation process to adapt to the needs of the application and the preferences of the scientific team. In Algorithm 3, we modify the standard BO pseudocode to illustrate how human-in-the-loop decision-making can be incorporated as a simple variant of the basic BO workflow. This human-in-the-loop approach enables the optimisation process to benefit from both the data-driven guidance of BO and the nuanced judgement of domain experts. Such a workflow is extremely straightforward to implement at the code level, especially for natural scientists without a strong background in computer science. 46 BO Tutorial 

Algorithm 3 Bayesian Optimisation with Human-in-the-Loop 

Require: Design space X , objective evaluator evaluate( f, x): 

> 1:

Choose a finite subset xinit = ( x1, . . . , x n_init ) ⊂ X for initial observations , possibly by humans  

> 2:

Evaluate yinit ← evaluate( f, xinit ) 

> 3:

Construct dataset D ← { (xi, y i)}n_init i=1  

> 4:

repeat  

> 5:

Fit surrogate model M(ˆf |ˆx, D) from data D 

> 6:

Construct acquisition function α(x | D ) from D and the surrogate M 

> 7:

if human intervention is needed then  

> 8:

Propose a set of candidate points Xcand (e.g., top k by acquisition value)  

> 9:

Expert reviews Xcand , and either selects a point x′ to evaluate, or overrides/rejects all candidates and suggests an alternative  

> 10:

else  

> 11:

x′ ← arg max x α(x | D ) 

> 12:

end if  

> 13:

Evaluate the objective function: y′ ← evaluate( f, x ′) 

> 14:

Augment data: D ← D ∪ { (x′, y ′)} 

> 15:

until Stopping criteria are satisfied  

> 16:

Recommended final solution x∗ from D and M. 

> 17:

return x∗

Regarding research advances in human-in-the-loop BO, certain approaches [1, 108] employ preference learning or ex-pert belief modelling. Recent studies have also investigated whether human experts can be replaced by large language models [13], which is promising for fully-automated knowledge integration. 

## 16 Coding BO Workflows 

In this section, we present BO implementations at the code level. First, we show how to implement BO using an existing BO library such as HEBO, where both standard and human-in-the-loop variants are illustrated. Then, we build custom workflows with Gaussian Process surrogates and acquisition functions. 

16.1 Coding the Workflow with HEBO 

In this section, we demonstrate how to implement the Bayesian optimisation (BO) workflow using the HEBO library. HEBO (Heteroscedastic Evolutionary Bayesian Optimisation) is a state-of-the-art BO framework that handles mixed-variable design spaces, supports parallel suggestions, and addresses heteroscedasticity and non-stationarity through input and output transformations [15]. We recall Section 4 and assume the optimisation problem is already defined with a design space and an evaluation interface as follows: • space : an instance of DesignSpace from HEBO, which encapsulates the parameter definitions (continuous, integer, categorical, etc.). • evaluate(xs) : a function that takes a pandas DataFrame of design points (one per row) and returns a NumPy array of corresponding objective values (to be maximised). Because HEBO is designed for minimisation, we maximise by observing the negative of the original objective. 

16.1.1 General Workflow Using HEBO 

The basic BO loop proceeds according to the structure introduced in Algorithm 1. The key components are imple-mented as follows: • Initialisation: HEBO automatically performs an initial random exploration phase. The number of random samples is controlled by the rand_sample argument; if not specified, it defaults to 1 + number of parameters. This corresponds to the “initial observations" step. • Surrogate model and acquisition function: These are internal to HEBO. Each call to suggest fits the sur-rogate (a Gaussian process by default) to all available data, constructs an acquisition function (e.g., MACE), and maximises it to propose the next candidate(s). 47 BO Tutorial • Termination: We use a simple fixed budget T (number of iterations) as the stopping criterion. • Final recommendation: After the loop, we select the best observed design (i.e., the point with the highest original objective value). The following listing implements this standard workflow.  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

import pandas as pd  

> 3

from hebo . design_space . design_space import DesignSpace  

> 4

from hebo . optimizers . hebo import HEBO  

> 56

# Assume space and evaluate are defined as described  

> 7

# space = DesignSpace () . parse (...)  

> 8

# def evaluate ( xs : pd . DataFrame ) -> np . ndarray : ...  

> 910

T = 50 # total iterations ( budget )  

> 11

opt = HEBO ( space , rand_sample =10 , scramble_seed =42) # 10 initial random points  

> 12 13

for t in range ( T ) :  

> 14

candidates = opt . suggest ( n_suggestions =1) # DataFrame with one row  

> 15

y_orig = evaluate ( candidates ) # original objective ( maximize )  

> 16

opt . observe ( candidates , - y_orig ) # HEBO minimizes -> observe negative  

> 17 18

best_orig = - np . min ( opt . y ) # best so far ( original scale )  

> 19

print ( f " Iter { t +1}: y = { y_orig [0]:.4 f } , best = { best_orig :.4 f } " )  

> 20 21

# Final recommendation  

> 22

best_idx = np . argmin ( opt . y ) # index of smallest ( - y )  

> 23

best_x = opt . X . iloc [[ best_idx ]]  

> 24

best_y = - opt . y [ best_idx ][0]  

> 25

print ( " \ nBest design :\ n " , best_x )  

> 26

print ( f " Best objective : { best_y :.4 f } " ) 

16.1.2 HumanintheLoop Workflow Using HEBO 

In many scientific applications, it is desirable to incorporate human expertise directly into the optimisation loop. A simple yet effective approach is to let the algorithm propose a batch of promising candidates, from which the human expert selects one for actual evaluation. This hybrid workflow retains the data-driven guidance of BO while allowing domain knowledge to override or refine algorithmic suggestions. The same BO components as above are used, but the candidate-selection step is replaced by an interactive human decision. The loop continues until the budget T is exhausted, and the final recommendation remains the best observed point. The implementation extends the standard loop by generating a batch of batch_size candidates, displaying them with their indices, and prompting the user to enter the index of the chosen point. Input validation ensures a valid selection. The selected point is then evaluated and fed back to the optimiser.  

> 1

T = 30  

> 2

batch_size = 5 

> 3

opt = HEBO ( space , rand_sample =10 , scramble_seed =42)  

> 45

for t in range ( T ) :  

> 6

candidates = opt . suggest ( n_suggestions = batch_size )  

> 7

print ( " \ nCandidates ( index ) :\ n " , candidates . to_string ( index = True ) )  

> 89

# Get valid input from human  

> 10

while True :  

> 11

try :  

> 12

choice = int ( input ( " Select index : " ) )  

> 13

if 0 <= choice < len ( candidates ) :  

> 14

break  

> 15

else :  

> 16

print ( f " Index must be between 0 and { len ( candidates ) -1}. " )  

> 17

except ValueError : 

48 BO Tutorial                                        

> 18 print ( " Invalid input . Please enter an integer . " )
> 19 20 selected =candidates . iloc [[ choice ]]
> 21 y_orig =evaluate ( selected )
> 22 opt . observe ( selected , - y_orig )
> 23 24 best_orig =- np . min ( opt . y )
> 25 print ( f " Evaluated y={ y_orig [0]:.4 f } , best ={ best_orig :.4 f } " )
> 26 27 best_idx =np . argmin ( opt . y )
> 28 best_x =opt . X . iloc [[ best_idx ]]
> 29 best_y =- opt . y [ best_idx ][0]
> 30 print ( " \ nBest design :\ n " , best_x )
> 31 print ( f " Best objective : { best_y :.4 f } " )

16.2 Coding the Workflow from a Customised Surrogate and Acquisition Function 

In this section, we implement a complete Bayesian optimisation (BO) workflow by integrating the Gaussian process (GP) surrogate models from Section 9.2 and the acquisition functions from Section 12.2 into a full optimisation loop. We use the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function as a working example, with the exploration parameter set to β = 2 .0, and initialise the GP with a Matérn kernel. The same loop structure, however, directly applies to other acquisition functions such as Expected Improvement (EI) and Probability of Improvement (PI). For illustration, we consider a two-dimensional design space X = [0 , 1] 2. At each BO iteration, we maximise the acquisition function via a grid search over a dense mesh of candidate points. This strategy is practical for low-dimensional problems and provides a transparent demonstration of the BO workflow. As a synthetic test problem, we optimise the function 

f (x1, x 2) = sin(5 πx 1) cos(5 πx 2) + 0 .5 cos(10 πx 1) sin(10 πx 2),

which is a wavy function with multiple local optima in two dimensions. In a real application, this synthetic objective and the 2D grid would be replaced by the actual black-box objective (e.g., an experimental measurement or simulation) and the true design space (which may be high-dimensional, mixed, or constrained). The overall structure of the loop remains unchanged and follows Algorithm 1: • Initialisation: We randomly sample a few points from the design space to form the initial dataset. Here we use a simple random design; more sophisticated spacefilling designs could be substituted. • Surrogate update: At each iteration, a GP is fitted to all available data. • Acquisition maximisation: We create a fine mesh of candidate points in [0 , 1] 2, compute the UCB value for each, and select the point with the highest acquisition. • Evaluation: The chosen point is evaluated using the true objective function (here a synthetic test function). The new observation is added to the dataset. • Termination: A fixed budget of iterations is used as the stopping criterion. • Final recommendation: After the loop, we return the best observed point (the one with the highest objective value, since we are maximising). 

Remark on Practical Use. The implementations in this section are intentionally minimal and serve solely to illus-trate the core concepts of Bayesian optimisation with custom surrogate models and acquisition functions. In a real application, the synthetic test function and the two-dimensional grid would be replaced by the actual black-box ob-jective (e.g., an experimental measurement or simulation) and the true design space (which may be high-dimensional, mixed, or constrained). The structure of the loop, however, remains unchanged. Production-grade BO often requires additional features such as parallel (batched) evaluations, support for mixed continuous/discrete spaces, sophisticated acquisition optimisation, and robust handling of noise and non-stationarity. Incorporating these elements from scratch would require a significant amount of code and external libraries. For real-world applications, we recommend leverag-ing established libraries such as HEBO [15], BoTorch [3], or BayesOpt/GPy [69], which encapsulate these complexi-ties and offer well-tested, scalable implementations. 49 BO Tutorial 

16.2.1 BO Workflow with Scikit-Learn 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ sklearn.ipynb 

The following code implements a full BO loop using a Scikit-Learn [70] GaussianProcessRegressor and the UCB acquisition function defined earlier in Section 12.2.1. The kernel and hyperparameters are automatically optimised by ScikitLearns fit method. The key steps follow Algorithm 1:  

> 1

import numpy as np  

> 2

from sklearn . gaussian_process import GaussianProcessRegressor  

> 3

from sklearn . gaussian_process . kernels import Matern , ConstantKernel  

> 45

# ---------- Test objective ( maximisation ) ---------- 

> 6

def f_true ( X ) :  

> 7

# X : shape ( n_points , 2)  

> 8

x1 = X [: , 0]  

> 9

x2 = X [: , 1]  

> 10

return np . sin (5 * np . pi * x1 ) * np . cos (5 * np . pi * x2 ) + \ 

> 11

0.5 * np . cos (10 * np . pi * x1 ) * np . sin (10 * np . pi * x2 )  

> 12 13

# ---------- Initialisation ---------- 

> 14

n_init = 5 

> 15

X_init = np . random . uniform (0 , 1 , ( n_init , 2) )  

> 16

y_init = f_true ( X_init ) . ravel ()  

> 17 18

X = X_init . copy ()  

> 19

y = y_init . copy ()  

> 20 21

# --------- The Grid for Acquisition ----------- 

> 22

grid_size = 100 # grid density per dimension for acquisition maximisation  

> 23

x1_grid = np . linspace (0 , 1 , grid_size )  

> 24

x2_grid = np . linspace (0 , 1 , grid_size )  

> 25

X_mesh = np . array ( np . meshgrid ( x1_grid , x2_grid ) ) . reshape (2 , -1) . T # shape (grid_size **2 , 2)  

> 26 27

# ---------- BO loop ---------- 

> 28

for t in range (20) : # A fixed number of iterations after initialisation  

> 29

# Fit GP  

> 30

kernel = ConstantKernel (1.0) * Matern ( length_scale =0.2 , nu =2.5)  

> 31

gp = GaussianProcessRegressor ( kernel = kernel , alpha =1 e -6 , n_restarts_optimizer =10)  

> 32

gp . fit (X , y )  

> 33 34

# Maximise UCB on the 2 D grid  

> 35

ucb = acq_ucb ( X_mesh , gp , beta =2.0) # Previously defined acquisition function  

> 36

x_next = X_mesh [ np . argmax ( ucb ) ]. reshape (1 , -1)  

> 37 38

# Evaluate true function  

> 39

y_next = f_true ( x_next ) . ravel ()  

> 40 41

# Update data  

> 42

X = np . vstack ([ X , x_next ])  

> 43

y = np . hstack ([ y , y_next ])  

> 44 45

# Optional : print progress  

> 46

best_y = np . max ( y )  

> 47

print ( f " Iter { t +1}: selected x = { x_next [0 ,0]:.4 f } ,{ x_next [0 ,1]:.4 f } , y = {y_next [0]:.4 f } , best so far = { best_y :.4 f } " )  

> 48 49

# ---------- Final recommendation ---------- 

> 50

best_idx = np . argmax ( y )  

> 51

x_best = X [ best_idx ]  

> 52

y_best = y [ best_idx ]  

> 53

print ( f " \ nBest found : x = [{ x_best [0]:.4 f } , { x_best [1]:.4 f }] , y = { y_best :.4 f } " ) 

50 BO Tutorial This workflow directly implements the concepts from the preceding sections. The surrogate model is updated every iteration, the acquisition function is built from its predictions, and the next point is selected by maximising that acquisition. The grid search, while simple, guarantees the global optimum of the acquisition over the discretised space; for higher dimensions more sophisticated optimisers would be required. 

16.2.2 BO Workflow with GPyTorch 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/coding_illustrations/gp_bo_ gpytorch.ipynb 

For GPyTorch [25], the same logical structure applies, but the implementation differs in how the model is defined and trained. The code below demonstrates a complete BO loop using GPyTorch with the UCB acquisition function in two dimensions. For implementation, we use the previously defined GPModel and acq_ucb_torch in Sections 9.2.2 and 12.2.2, respectively. The GP model and likelihood are instantiated before the optimisation loop, and an inner training loop is included to fit the hyperparameters by maximising the marginal likelihood. Acquisition maximisation again uses a grid, but the grid points must be passed as PyTorch tensors.  

> 1

import torch  

> 2

import gpytorch  

> 3

import numpy as np  

> 45

# ---------- Test objective ( maximisation ) ---------- 

> 6

def f_true ( X ) :  

> 7

# X : shape (... , 2)  

> 8

x1 = X [... , 0]  

> 9

x2 = X [... , 1]  

> 10

return torch . sin (5 * np . pi * x1 ) * torch . cos (5 * np . pi * x2 ) + \ 

> 11

0.5 * torch . cos (10 * np . pi * x1 ) * torch . sin (10 * np . pi * x2 )  

> 12 13

# ---------- Initialisation ---------- 

> 14

n_init = 5 

> 15

X_init = torch . rand ( n_init , 2)  

> 16

y_init = f_true ( X_init ) . squeeze ()  

> 17 18

X = X_init . clone ()  

> 19

y = y_init . clone ()  

> 20 21

# ---------- GP model ( Use previously defined ) ---------- 

> 22

likelihood = gpytorch . likelihoods . GaussianLikelihood ()  

> 23

model = GPModel (X , y , likelihood )  

> 24

optimizer = torch . optim . Adam ( model . parameters () , lr =0.1)  

> 25

mll = gpytorch . mlls . Exact MarginalLogLikelihood ( likelihood , model )  

> 26 27

# --------- The Grid for Acquisition ----------- 

> 28

grid_size = 100  

> 29

x1_grid = torch . linspace (0 , 1 , grid_size )  

> 30

x2_grid = torch . linspace (0 , 1 , grid_size )  

> 31

X_mesh = torch . stack ( torch . meshgrid ( x1_grid , x2_grid , indexing = ’ ij ’) , dim = -1) . reshape ( -1 , 2)  

> 32 33

# ---------- BO loop ---------- 

> 34

for t in range (20) : # A fixed number of iterations after initialisation  

> 35

# Inner - training loop for GP hyperparameters  

> 36

model . train ()  

> 37

likelihood . train ()  

> 38

model . set_train_data (X , y , strict = False ) # Update training data for GP  

> 39

for i in range (100) :  

> 40

optimizer . zero_grad ()  

> 41

output = model ( X )  

> 42

loss = - mll ( output , y )  

> 43

loss . backward ()  

> 44

optimizer . step () 

> 45

51 BO Tutorial                                                                             

> 46 ucb =acq_ucb_torch ( X_mesh , model , beta =2.0) #Use previously defined acquisition function
> 47 x_next =X_mesh [ torch . argmax ( ucb ) ]. view (1 , 2)
> 48 49 #Evaluate true function
> 50 y_next =f_true ( x_next ) . squeeze ()
> 51 52 #Update data ( convert to tensors )
> 53 X=torch . cat ([ X , x_next ])
> 54 y=torch . cat ([ y , y_next . unsqueeze (0) ])
> 55 56 best_y =torch . max ( y ) . item ()
> 57 print ( f " Iter { t +1}: selected x=[{ x_next [0 ,0]. item () :.4 f } , { x_next [0 ,1]. item () :.4 f }] , y={ y_next . item () :.4 f } , best so far ={ best_y :.4 f } " )
> 58 59 #----------Final recommendation ----------
> 60 best_idx =torch . argmax ( y )
> 61 x_best =X [ best_idx ]
> 62 y_best =y [ best_idx ]. item ()
> 63 print ( f " \ nBest found : x=[{ x_best [0]. item () :.4 f } , { x_best [1]. item () :.4 f }] , y={y_best :.4 f } " )

This implementation follows the same pattern as the ScikitLearn version but leverages PyTorchs autograd for training and GPU support if available. The model is retrained from scratch at each iteration; in practice one could warmstart the hyperparameters, but for clarity we keep the loop simple. The acquisition maximisation again uses a dense grid, which is straightforward in 2D. 

## 17 Integrating BO with Scientific Tools 

In many scientific domains, optimisation must be performed over non-conventional spaces, such as molecules, which are typically represented by SMILES strings rather than standard numerical vectors. This presents unique challenges for Bayesian Optimisation (BO), as standard surrogate models and acquisition functions are designed for vector spaces. To address this, domain-specific feature extraction is often employed to map complex scientific objects (e.g., molecules, proteins, graphs) into a vector space suitable for surrogate modelling. 

17.1 Example: Molecular Descriptors for QED Optimisation 

Recalling the example in Section 5.5, we consider the problem of molecular optimisation. The search space is restricted to a large but finite set of candidate molecules, each represented by a SMILES string. The objective function is a black-box performance score of each molecule. As an illustrative example, we consider QED [7] as the molecular scoring function. We follow the Practical Molecule Optimisation benchmark [23], defining X as a subset of nearly 250,000 molecules represented by SMILES strings extracted from ZINC. To enable BO in this discrete, structured space, we employ molecular descriptors provided by RDKit [75] to construct a feature map. Specifically, each SMILES string is converted into a vector of chemically meaningful descriptors, including molecular weight, logP, number of hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, topological polar surface area, etc. This feature vector serves as the input to the surrogate model, allowing the GP to operate in a continuous vector space while retaining the underlying chemical information. Specifically, the BO workflow is adapted as follows: • Surrogate Model: A Gaussian process (GP) is used as the surrogate, but instead of operating directly on SMILES strings, it models the relationship between molecular descriptor vectors and the QED score. • Acquisition Function: The Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function is constructed using the GP’s posterior mean and variance over the descriptor space. • Acquisition Optimisation: Since the search space is large and discrete, we sample a subset of candidate molecules at each iteration, compute their descriptors, and select the top candidates according to the acquisi-tion function. 52 BO Tutorial • Batching: The algorithm supports batch selection by choosing multiple candidates per iteration, which is practical for high-throughput experimental settings. 

17.2 Coding Implementation with GPyTorch and RDKit Descriptors 

https://github.com/zwyu-ai/BO-Tutorial-for-Sci/blob/main/molecule.ipynb 

Customising existing BO libraries for arbitrary scientific spaces can be challenging, as it often requires deep familiarity with the library internals and substantial coding effort. Instead, we demonstrate a flexible and transparent approach by implementing the workflow from scratch using GPyTorch for the Gaussian Process surrogate, and RDKit for feature extraction. Here, each molecule (represented as a SMILES string) is mapped to a vector of chemical descriptors, enabling the GP to operate in a continuous latent space. 

Gaussian Process Model We have already shown how to use GPyTorch to construct a Gaussian Process in a con-tinuous space in Section 9.2.2. In this molecular setting, the only change is that the GP is defined on the descriptor feature space, rather than directly on the design variables. The GP model is defined as follows, using a Matérn kernel and a constant mean function:  

> 1

import gpytorch  

> 23

class GPModel ( gpytorch . models . ExactGP ) :  

> 4

def __init__ ( self , train_x , train_y , likelihood ) :  

> 5

super () . __init__ ( train_x , train_y , likelihood )  

> 6

self . mean_module = gpytorch . means . ConstantMean ()  

> 7

self . covar_module = gpytorch . kernels . ScaleKernel (  

> 8

gpytorch . kernels . MaternKernel ()  

> 9

) 

> 10 11

def forward ( self , x ) :  

> 12

mean_x = self . mean_module ( x )  

> 13

covar_x = self . covar_module ( x )  

> 14

return gpytorch . distributions . MultivariateNormal ( mean_x , covar_x ) 

Descriptor Feature Extraction We use RDKit to extract a set of chemically meaningful descriptors from each SMILES string. If a SMILES string is invalid, the function returns None , which is handled downstream in the surrogate model.  

> 1

from rdkit import Chem  

> 2

from rdkit . Chem import Descriptors , Lipinski  

> 34

descriptor_map = { 

> 5

" molecular_weight " : Descriptors . MolWt ,  

> 6

" logp " : Descriptors . MolLogP ,  

> 7

" tpsa " : Descriptors . TPSA ,  

> 8

" num_h_bond_donors " : Lipinski . NumHDonors ,  

> 9

" num_h_bond_acceptors " : Lipinski . NumHAcceptors ,  

> 10

" heavy_atom_count " : Descriptors . HeavyAtomCount ,  

> 11

" num_aromatic_rings " : Descriptors . NumAromaticRings ,  

> 12

" ring_count " : Descriptors . RingCount ,  

> 13

" num_rotatable_bonds " : Descriptors . NumRotatableBonds ,  

> 14

" num_heteroatoms " : Descriptors . NumHeteroatoms  

> 15

} 

> 16

N_DESCRIPTORS = len ( descriptor_map )  

> 17 18

def calc ulat e_de scri ptor _vec tor ( smiles : str ) -> list [ float ]:  

> 19

mol = Chem . MolFromSmiles ( smiles )  

> 20

if mol is None :  

> 21

return None  

> 22

return [ func ( mol ) for func in descriptor_map . values () ] 

53 BO Tutorial 

Surrogate Model with Descriptor Feature Layer The surrogate model wraps the GP and handles the mapping from SMILES to descriptors. Invalid SMILES are assigned a fixed low score and zero uncertainty, ensuring robust handling of noisy or malformed inputs.  

> 1

import torch  

> 23

class SurrogateModel :  

> 4

def __init__ ( self , invalid_score : float = -1 , device = " auto " ) :  

> 5

if device == " auto " :  

> 6

self . device = torch . device ( " cuda " if torch . cuda . is_available () else "cpu " )  

> 7

else :  

> 8

self . device = torch . device ( device )  

> 9

self . gp = None  

> 10

self . feature = cal cula te_descr ipto r_vector  

> 11

self . invalid_score = invalid_score  

> 12

self . _train_x = []  

> 13

self . _train_y = []  

> 14 15

def add_data ( self , smiles : str , y : float ) :  

> 16

vec = self . feature ( smiles )  

> 17

if vec is not None :  

> 18

self . _train_x . append ( vec )  

> 19

self . _train_y . append ( y )  

> 20 21

def fit ( self , grad_step : int = 100) :  

> 22

device = self . device  

> 23

train_x = torch . tensor ( self . _train_x , device = device , dtype = torch . float32 )  

> 24

train_y = torch . tensor ( self . _train_y , device = device , dtype = torch . float32 )  

> 25

if self . gp is None :  

> 26

likelihood = gpytorch . likelihoods . GaussianLikelihood ()  

> 27

self . gp = GPModel ( train_x , train_y , likelihood ) . to ( device )  

> 28

else :  

> 29

self . gp . set_train_data ( train_x , train_y , strict = False )  

> 30

likelihood = self . gp . likelihood  

> 31

self . gp . train ()  

> 32

likelihood . train ()  

> 33

optimizer = torch . optim . Adam ( self . gp . parameters () , lr =0.1)  

> 34

mll = gpytorch . mlls . ExactMarginalL ogLikelihood ( likelihood , self . gp )  

> 35

for _ in range ( grad_step ) :  

> 36

optimizer . zero_grad ()  

> 37

output = self . gp ( train_x )  

> 38

loss = - mll ( output , train_y )  

> 39

loss . backward ()  

> 40

optimizer . step ()  

> 41 42

def __call__ ( self , smiles_list : list [ str ]) :  

> 43

if self . gp is None :  

> 44

raise ValueError ( " Model not trained yet " )  

> 45

features = torch . zeros (( len ( smiles_list ) , N_DESCRIPTORS ) ,  

> 46

device = self . device , dtype = torch . float32 )  

> 47

invalid = torch . zeros ( len ( smiles_list ) , device = self . device , dtype = torch . bool )  

> 48

for i , smi in enumerate ( smiles_list ) :  

> 49

feature = self . feature ( smi )  

> 50

if feature is not None :  

> 51

features [ i ] = torch . tensor ( feature )  

> 52

else :  

> 53

invalid [ i ] = True  

> 54

self . gp . eval ()  

> 55

self . gp . likelihood . eval ()  

> 56

with torch . no_grad () , gpytorch . settings . fast_pred_var () :  

> 57

pred = self . gp . likelihood ( self . gp ( features ) )  

> 58

mu = pred . mean . clone ()  

> 59

sigma = pred . stddev . clone () 

54 BO Tutorial  

> 60

mu [ invalid ] = self . invalid_score  

> 61

sigma [ invalid ] = 0.0  

> 62

return mu , sigma 

Acquisition Function and Candidate Selection Since the design space (all molecules in ZINC) is extremely large and discrete, exhaustive search is infeasible. Instead, at each iteration, we randomly sample a large subset of candidate molecules, compute their descriptors, and select the top-k according to the acquisition function (here, UCB). This approach naturally supports batched acquisition. More advanced alternatives, such as evolutionary search or learned acquisition optimisers, can be considered for further efficiency, but are not included in this tutorial.  

> 1

def acquisition_ucb ( smiles_list : list [ str ] , surrogate : SurrogateModel , beta : float = 2.0) :  

> 2

mu , sigma = surrogate ( smiles_list )  

> 3

return mu + beta * sigma 

Bayesian Optimisation Loop The core BO loop is as follows. At each iteration, the surrogate is fitted, a batch of 

n_acq candidates is sampled, the acquisition function is evaluated, and the top-k molecules are selected and evaluated. The best molecule found so far is tracked for reporting.  

> 1

# Assume : search_space , objective , and all parameters are already defined  

> 23

# Initialisation  

> 4

surrogate = SurrogateModel ( invalid_score = INVALID_SCORE )  

> 5

xs = random . sample ( search_space , n_init )  

> 6

ys = [ objective ( smi , INVALID_SCORE ) for smi in xs ]  

> 7

for x , y in zip ( xs , ys ) :  

> 8

surrogate . add_data (x , y )  

> 910

# BO loop  

> 11

for n in range ( n_init , total_budget , batch_size ) :  

> 12

surrogate . fit ( grad_step = grad_step )  

> 13

candidates = random . sample ( search_space , n_acq )  

> 14

scores = acquisition_ucb ( candidates , surrogate , beta =2.0)  

> 15

k = min ( batch_size , total_budget - n )  

> 16

top_k = torch . argsort ( scores , descending = True ) [: k ]  

> 17

top_candidates = [ candidates [ i ] for i in top_k . tolist () ]  

> 18

for x in top_candidates :  

> 19

y = objective (x , INVALID_SCORE )  

> 20

xs . append ( x )  

> 21

ys . append ( y )  

> 22

surrogate . add_data (x , y )  

> 23 24

# Final recommendation  

> 25

best_idx = int ( torch . argmax ( torch . tensor ( ys ) ) )  

> 26

print ( f " Best molecule found : QED = { ys [ best_idx ]:.4 f } , SMILES = { xs [ best_idx ]} " ) 

55 BO Tutorial 

# Part V 

# Demonstrative Experiments and Conclusion 

This part builds directly on the theoretical foundations, algorithmic components and implementation workflows of Bayesian optimisation (BO) detailed in the preceding sections, using a rigorous, consistent experimental framework to empirically validate the performance of BO across real-world scientific discovery tasks. Its core purpose is to provide readers with evidence-based, practical insights into how BO performs in diverse research settings, alongside a clear understanding of its practical utility, limitations and broader relevance to scientific inquiry. In this part, we demonstrate BO as an effective discovery framework through robust and reproducible experiments. Through systematic analysis of results across catalysis, materials science, organic synthesis and molecular design tasks, readers will gain a concrete, empirically grounded understanding of the consistent performance advantage of BO over blind random search in resource-constrained scientific optimisation. They will also learn the core algorithmic design features that drive performance differences between standard BO implementations and state-of-the-art frame-works such as HEBO, and how task characteristics—including constrained design spaces, mixed-variable inputs, high dimensionality and discrete structured search spaces—shape optimisation behaviour. Finally, via the critical discussion and concluding sections, readers will develop a nuanced awareness of the practical limitations and implementation barriers to BO deployment in real laboratory settings, alongside a deep appreciation of the fundamental alignment between the BO framework and the core principles of the scientific method. The part concludes with a structured vision of the future development and adoption of BO, to contextualise how readers can apply these methods to accelerate their own research, both now and as the field evolves. 

## 18 Experimental Settings 

In this part, we systematically evaluate the performance of Bayesian optimisation (BO) across a diverse set of scien-tific discovery tasks, following a consistent experimental protocol to ensure comparability. We consider two broad categories of optimisation problems: those with a natural mathematical formulation of the design space, comprising numerical or categorical variables, and those defined over non-conventional, structured spaces such as molecules. 

Mathematical Design-Space Problems We consider four cases that have a design space with a clear mathematical definition, including photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) catalyst design, high-entropy alloy (HEA) nanozyme formulation, oxygen evolution reaction (OER) electrocatalyst design, and Buchwald-Hartwig (BH) organic synthesis yield optimisation. The design spaces of these problems are all mixtures of simple mathematical variables, such as bounded real-value variables or categorical variables. All experiments above follow a consistent protocol to ensure comparability across cases. In each case, the objective function is evaluated using a mock oracle —a predictive model (e.g., random forest) trained on empirical datasets, which allows us to efficiently evaluate optimisation performance without incurring the cost of real-world experiments. For each problem, we evaluate three distinct optimisation strategies: HEBO [15], a state-of-the-art BO framework designed to handle complex design spaces; standard BO with the Lower Confidence Bound (LCB) acquisition function [91], using a Gaussian process (GP) as the surrogate model; and random search, a baseline method that samples candidate points uniformly at random from the design space. Each strategy is run for 200 iterations, with 20 initial random samples used to initialise the surrogate model. To ensure statistical robustness, all experiments are repeated with 16 different random seeds, and results are reported as the mean cumulative best value across seeds, with shaded regions indicating the standard error. For HER, HEA, and BH reactions, the goal is to maximise the objective (the reaction yield or the catalytic efficiency). We assess performance using regret curves for the best solution found at each iteration, defined as the difference between the global optimum and the objective value: 

r∗ 

> t

:= y⋆ − min  

> 0≤i≤t

yi,

where yi is the objective at the i-th iteration and y⋆ is the global maximum objective extrapolated from the dataset. For OER, we directly plot the overpotential in millivolts, which we aim to minimise. In all cases, faster declines in these curves indicate better optimisation performance. 

The Chemical Molecule Optimisation Problem To demonstrate the applicability of BO to general, non-mathematical spaces, We focus on maximising the quantitative estimate of drug-likeness (QED) score of a drug-56 BO Tutorial like molecule within a set of 250,000 discrete choices. Here, we use the ready-made interface rdkit.Chem.QED 

from RDKit [75] as the oracle of the objective function. The BO implementation is based on RDKit molecular de-scriptors and GPyTorch, as described in earlier sections of this tutorial. The following parameters are used in the experiment: total_budget = 100 , n_init = 20 , batch_size = 10 , n_acq = 20000 , grad_step = 50 , and 

INVALID_SCORE = -1 . These control the total number of evaluations, initial random samples, batch size per iter-ation, number of acquisition candidates, GP training steps, and the penalty for invalid molecules, respectively. We compare the performance of BO (with a GP surrogate and the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) acquisition function) to random search, with each method run for the fixed budget of evaluations and repeated across 16 random seeds for statistical robustness. 

## 19 Experimental Results 

The experimental results across all tasks reveal a consistent performance advantage of advanced Bayesian optimisation (BO) frameworks over random search, while standard BO implementations show task-dependent performance: they deliver robust improvements in most scenarios, but underperform in more challenging mixed-variable settings. In this section, we first present the overall trends observed across all case studies, then provide a detailed analysis of the results for each individual task. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200                         

> Iteration
> 10
> 12
> 14
> 16
> 18
> 20
> 22
> 24
> Regret ( yield  * yield )
> HER Optimization
> HEBO
> BO (LCB)
> Random Search
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Iteration
> 140
> 160
> 180
> 200
> 220
> 240
> 260
> 280
> 300
> Regret ( E * E)
> HEA Nanozyme Optimization
> HEBO
> BO (LCB)
> Random Search
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Iteration
> 220
> 240
> 260
> 280
> 300
> 320
> Overpotential (mV)
> OER Optimization
> HEBO
> BO (LCB)
> Random Search
> 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
> Iteration
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> 70
> 80
> Regret ( yield  * yield )
> BH Reaction Optimization
> HEBO
> BO (LCB)
> Random Search

Figure 9: The optimisation curves (the best input found after each iteration) for the problems with a mathematical design space. We compare HEBO with random search and standard BO with LCB acquisition. For reproducibility, each curve averages runs across 16 random seeds, and the shaded area displays the standard error across seeds. Across the four mathematical design space problems, as shown in Figure 9, the state-of-the-art HEBO framework consistently outperforms random search across all scenarios. Standard BO with the LCB acquisition function (here-after BO-LCB) delivers robust improvements over random search in continuous, constrained and high-dimensional continuous tasks, but fails to outperform random search in the mixed-variable OER electrocatalyst design task. For all tasks where BO-based methods outperform random search, the performance gap is particularly pronounced in later iterations, where adaptive BO strategies continue to identify improved solutions while random search stagnates. This confirms the critical advantage of data-driven, adaptive exploration over blind sampling in high-dimensional scientific design spaces, where exhaustive evaluation is computationally or experimentally infeasible, while also highlighting that standard BO implementations require careful tailoring to handle complex, heterogeneous design spaces. Notably, HEBO consistently achieves lower regret (or lower overpotential) than BO-LCB across all cases after an equivalent number of iterations, and also demonstrates faster convergence in early iterations to identify near-optimal so-lutions more rapidly. This performance improvement can be attributed to HEBOs core design features that address key limitations of standard BO-LCB: its support for non-stationary objective functions, robust handling of heteroscedastic noise, and multi-objective acquisition function that balances exploration and exploitation via dynamic weighting of EI, PI and LCB criteria. This early-stage efficiency is particularly valuable for scientific experiments, where each iteration incurs significant experimental cost, and early convergence can deliver substantial savings in time and resources. 

19.1 Photocatalytic HER Catalyst Design 

The photocatalytic HER catalyst design task is defined over a 10-dimensional continuous parameter space. All three optimisation strategies initiate with comparable performance, as they share 20 identical random initial samples. BO-based strategies rapidly diverge from random search as iterations proceed. HEBO exhibits the fastest initial convergence, reducing regret from approximately 24 to below 15 within the first 50 iterations, and continues to improve steadily to a final regret of 9.2 after 200 iterations. BO-LCB follows a similar trajectory but with marginally slower 57 BO Tutorial convergence, reaching a final regret of around 12. In contrast, random search delivers only marginal improvement after the initial sampling phase, stagnating at a final regret of 21.8 for the majority of the optimisation run. This performance gap translates to substantial practical benefits for experimental workflows: HEBO achieves a final performance more than twice that of random search, and reaches the final performance of random search within the first 30 iterations, corresponding to an 85% reduction in required experimental effort. The improved convergence of HEBO relative to BO-LCB in this continuous space stems from its ability to model the non-stationary relationship between catalyst parameters and HER performance, alongside its balanced multi-objective acquisition strategy that avoids over-exploration in later optimisation stages. 

19.2 High-Entropy Alloy Nanozyme Formulation 

The HEA nanozyme formulation task presents a challenging constrained optimisation problem, defined over a bounded simplex design space. Here, the sum of the five elemental ratios must equal 1, with each individual element constrained to the range [0.05, 0.35], creating a narrow feasible region that limits the utility of blind sampling. As introduced in Section 5.2.1, we employ a bi-projective transform such that the bounded simplex is mapped to a unit box, where common BO software best applies. HEBO demonstrates the strongest performance in this constrained setting, navigating the design space efficiently to reduce regret from an initial value of around 290 to a final value of 153 after 200 iterations, with a smooth and consistent convergence profile. BO-LCB also outperforms random search but struggles more with the constrained design space, achieving a final regret of around 238. Random search, by contrast, is highly inefficient in this setting: a large fraction of its random samples fall outside the feasible region, providing no useful information for optimisation, and it stagnates at a final regret of 244 after only minimal improvement beyond the initial samples. The pronounced performance gap between HEBO and BO-LCB here can be attributed to two key design features. First, HEBOs native support for non-stationary objectives allows it to adapt to the rapidly changing performance land-scape across the simplex constraint boundary. Second, its multi-objective acquisition function balances exploration of the feasible region with exploitation of known high-performance compositions, avoiding the over-exploration of unpromising regions that limits BO-LCBs convergence. This task highlights the value of advanced BO frameworks that can efficiently handle constrained design spaces, eliminating the waste of experimental resources on infeasible test conditions. 

19.3 OER Electrocatalyst Design 

The OER electrocatalyst design task is defined over a mixed-variable design space, combining categorical variables (including metal types and support materials) and continuous variables (such as annealing temperature and catalyst loading). This heterogeneous parameter space creates a highly non-stationary performance landscape with discrete jumps between categorical configurations, presenting notable challenges for standard BO implementations optimised for continuous, stationary objective functions. HEBO achieves the best final performance, reducing the overpotential from an initial value of around 320 mV to a final value of 219 mV after 200 iterations. In stark contrast, standard BO-LCB fails to outperform random search in this task: its convergence curve stagnates above the random search baseline throughout the optimisation run, reaching a final overpotential of approximately 252 mV, worse than the random search final value of 245 mV. Notably, HEBO shows particularly fast early convergence, reaching an overpotential below 250 mV within the first 50 iterations, a milestone that random search never achieves within the 200-iteration budget, and that BO-LCB fails to reach at all. The underperformance of BO-LCB in this mixed-variable setting can be directly attributed to the limitations of its standard Gaussian process surrogate and fixed LCB acquisition function. The stationary GP kernel used in stan-dard BO-LCB cannot adequately model the discrete, non-stationary shifts in performance across categorical variable choices, leading to poorly calibrated uncertainty estimates and misguided sampling. In turn, the fixed LCB acquisi-tion function over-explores unpromising regions of the design space based on these inaccurate uncertainty estimates, resulting in no net improvement over blind random sampling. HEBO mitigates these issues via its native support for non-stationary objective functions, which allows it to robustly model performance shifts across categorical and continuous variables, alongside its heteroscedastic noise modelling and dynamic multi-objective acquisition function that balances exploration and exploitation appropriately for this complex landscape. This task demonstrates that while standard BO implementations can fail in heterogeneous mixed-variable settings, advanced BO frameworks retain their efficiency and robustness, making them suitable for the diverse design spaces ubiquitous in real-world scientific research. 58 BO Tutorial 

19.4 Buchwald-Hartwig Reaction Yield Optimisation 

The Buchwald-Hartwig reaction yield optimisation task is a high-dimensional problem, originally defined over 530 DFT-derived features, which we reduce to the top 20 most predictive features for optimisation. Even with this di-mensionality reduction, the problem remains challenging due to the size of the search space and the complex, non-stationary relationship between molecular features and reaction yield. HEBO again delivers the strongest performance, reducing regret from an initial value of around 70 to a final value of 9.9 after 200 iterations, with a consistent and steady convergence rate throughout the optimisation process. BO-LCB follows a similar trajectory but with slower convergence, achieving a final regret of around 25. Random search, by contrast, shows very limited improvement after the initial sampling phase, stagnating at a final regret of 47. This demonstrates that, when combined with simple dimensionality reduction via conventional feature selection, Bayesian optimisation can still be effectively applied to high-dimensional problems. 

19.5 Molecular QED Optimisation 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

> Number of Evaluations
> 0.82
> 0.84
> 0.86
> 0.88
> 0.90
> 0.92
> 0.94
> Best Score Found
> Molecular QED Optimization (Batch Max)
> random search
> bo (descriptor)

Figure 10: Optimisation curves for molecular QED maximisation using descriptor-based GP-UCB and random search. Each curve shows the mean best QED score found across 16 random seeds; shaded regions indicate standard deviation. BO consistently outperforms random search, demonstrating the effectiveness of integrating BO with domain-specific scientific tools. The molecular QED optimisation task is defined over a discrete, structured space of SMILES strings representing drug-like molecules. To enable Gaussian process-based BO, we use RDKit molecular descriptors to map discrete SMILES strings into a continuous vector space, allowing the surrogate model to leverage chemical similarity between molecules for generalisation. We compare descriptor-based GP-UCB to random search for this task, with results presented in Figure 10. Both strategies initiate with a comparable mean initial QED score of approximately 0.86 from 20 shared random initial samples. However, the BO-based strategy rapidly outperforms random search, showing a steady increase in the best QED score found to reach a final mean value of 0.918 after 100 iterations. Random search, by contrast, delivers much slower improvement, reaching a final mean QED score of only 0.881. The performance gap is consistent across all iterations, with BO maintaining a clear advantage throughout the optimisation process. This task highlights the value of combining BO with domain-specific feature engineering for discrete scientific design spaces. By mapping discrete molecular structures into a chemically meaningful continuous space, we enable the GP surrogate model to generalise from known high-QED molecules to promising untested structures, rather than requir-ing blind sampling in the vast discrete space of possible molecular configurations. This demonstrates the flexibility of the BO framework to adapt to diverse scientific problem types, when paired with appropriate domain-informed preprocessing that aligns the design space with the assumptions of the GP surrogate model. 

## 20 Discussion 

The experimental results across all five case studies provide strong evidence for the value of Bayesian optimisation in scientific discovery, but also highlight important nuances in the performance of different BO variants across different 59 BO Tutorial types of problems. In this section, we discuss the applicability and value of BO for different scientific scenarios and challenges, explain why advanced frameworks like HEBO consistently outperform standard BO, and address the occasional underperformance of standard GP-UCB BO relative to random search in the early stages of high-dimensional problems. First, the overall consistency of BO’s advantage across all tasks demonstrates the broad applicability of the BO frame-work to scientific discovery. This broad applicability is not coincidental: as we discussed earlier in this tutorial, the iterative BO workflow of surrogate model fitting, acquisition function maximisation, experimental evaluation, and model updating, is a direct computational realisation of the classic Bayesian hypothetico-deductive scientific method. The surrogate model encodes the current state of scientific belief about the system under study, the acquisition function formalises the design of the next experiment to test that belief, and the new experimental data updates the belief. This deep alignment between the BO framework and the fundamental process of scientific inquiry means that BO is not just a useful optimisation tool, but a principled methodology for automating and accelerating the discovery process itself. However, while the theoretical framework of BO is broadly applicable, the practical implementation of BO for real-world scientific problems does face some important limitations at the software level. For example, the HEA nanozyme formulation task required a non-trivial invertible reparameterisation transform to map the bounded simplex design space into a standard hyper-rectangular space that could be handled by existing BO software. Similarly, the Buchwald-Hartwig reaction task required dimensionality reduction to make the high-dimensional problem tractable, and the molecular QED task required domain-specific feature engineering using RDKit molecular descriptors to map the dis-crete SMILES strings into a continuous vector space suitable for GP surrogate modelling. These steps are not always straightforward for experimental scientists without a strong background in machine learning or optimisation, high-lighting the need for more user-friendly, domain-specialised BO software tools that can handle these transformations automatically, without requiring manual implementation by the user. The occasional underperformance of standard GP-UCB BO relative to random search highlights a potential pitfall of BO in real-world scenarios, where the standard assumptions of stationarity and homoscedasticity do not hold. In contrast, the consistent superior performance of HEBO across all tasks, relative to both random search and standard BO (LCB), can be attributed to several key features of the HEBO framework that make it particularly well-suited to the complexities of real-world scientific optimisation problems. • First, HEBO natively supports mixed-variable design spaces, using appropriate kernels for different types of variables (e.g., Matern kernels for continuous variables and specialised Matern kernel with learnable em-beddings for categorical variables), which allows it to efficiently model the complex relationships between different types of experimental parameters. • Second, HEBO uses advanced techniques to handle heteroscedastic noise and non-stationary covariance func-tions, including input and output warping transformations, which make it more robust to the non-ideal condi-tions often encountered in real laboratory experiments, where measurement noise may vary across the design space and the objective function may not be smooth or stationary. • Third, HEBO uses the MACE acquisition function, a multi-objective synthesis of several canonical acquisi-tion functions including EI, PI, and LCB, which balances exploration and exploitation more robustly than any single acquisition function alone, particularly in complex or noisy scenarios. These features combine to make HEBO a highly robust and efficient framework for scientific optimisation, able to handle the diverse challenges presented by different scientific domains. 

## 21 Conclusion 

In this tutorial, we have systematically introduced Bayesian optimisation as a principled, efficient, and broadly ap-plicable framework for modern scientific discovery. Our content has spanned from the philosophical foundations of BO, framing scientific inquiry as a black-box optimisation problem that aligns with the Bayesian hypothetico-deductive model of knowledge acquisition, to the core building blocks of BO—surrogate models (notably Gaussian processes), acquisition functions balancing exploration and exploitation, and iterative algorithmic workflows—and finally to hands-on coding implementations with open-source tools and real-world case studies spanning catalysis, materials science, organic synthesis, and molecular design. We have validated the efficacy of BO across these diverse tasks, demonstrating that it consistently outperforms random search and traditional trial-and-error methods, reducing the number of experiments required by 60%–85% across all cases, and that advanced BO frameworks like HEBO exhibit superior robustness to the complexities of real-world scientific research. 60 BO Tutorial The scientific significance of the BO framework extends far beyond its utility as an optimisation tool. At its core, BO represents a paradigm shift in how we approach scientific discovery: from intuition-driven, manual trial-and-error to probabilistic, systematic, and increasingly automated exploration of vast scientific search spaces. The iterative BO workflow is not just an algorithm, but a computational crystallisation of the scientific method itself: the surrogate model acts as a probabilistic “digital twin” of the experimental system, encoding our evolving state of belief about the underlying natural laws; the acquisition function formalises the design of the next experiment, balancing the exploitation of existing knowledge with the exploration of uncharted domains; and the new experimental data updates our beliefs, refining the model and guiding the next iteration. This alignment means that BO does not replace the role of human scientists, but rather augments their intuition and expertise, allowing them to focus on high-level scientific thinking rather than the tedious mechanics of experimental design and trial-and-error. The automation of the discovery process enabled by BO has the potential to dramatically accelerate the pace of scientific progress, particularly in fields like sustainable energy, biomedicine, and climate science, where the need for rapid discovery is urgent. While the theoretical framework of BO is broadly applicable to scientific discovery, our tutorial has also high-lighted that there are important practical limitations at the software and implementation level that currently hinder its widespread adoption by experimental scientists. Many real-world scientific problems require non-trivial steps such as design space transformation, dimensionality reduction, or domain-specific feature engineering before they can be effectively optimised with existing BO tools, and these steps often require a strong background in machine learning or optimisation that many experimental scientists do not possess. This is where the present tutorial makes a unique contri-bution: unlike existing BO textbooks and tutorials, which are often targeted primarily at machine learning researchers and focus heavily on mathematical theory, our tutorial is specifically designed for a broad cross-disciplinary audience of scientific researchers. We provide tiered content—elementary conceptual explanations for general readers, practi-cal coding examples for experimental scientists, and rigorous mathematical foundations for method developers—and we focus on the practical challenges of applying BO to real-world scientific problems, including how to formulate a scientific question as an optimisation problem, how to define a design space, how to choose a surrogate model and acquisition function, and how to implement the full workflow in code. By bridging the gap between AI methodologi-cal advances and natural science applications, we aim to make principled, efficient experimental design accessible to every scientific researcher. For different audiences, our tutorial offers distinct value. For experimental scientists in chemistry, materials science, and related fields, we provide an accessible, ready-to-use tool that can be integrated into existing laboratory workflows with minimal programming experience, eliminating the inefficiency of intuitive trial-and-error and ensuring every expensive experiment delivers maximum information and value. For machine learning method developers, we high-light the unique, under-explored challenges of scientific discovery—including the integration of domain-specific prior knowledge, handling of constrained and non-Euclidean design spaces, human-in-the-loop interaction, and robustness to real-world experimental imperfections—that represent high-impact directions for future methodological innovation. For general readers, we offer a window into a new paradigm of scientific research, where probabilistic reasoning and systematic automation are transforming how we explore the natural world. 

21.1 Limitations 

While this tutorial prioritizes HEBO as the primary software implementation (justified by its state-of-the-art perfor-mance in mixed-variable optimization), we acknowledge this focus as a deliberate limitation in software coverage. A diverse ecosystem of robust and widely adopted Bayesian optimization (BO) packages exists (e.g. BayesOpt [69], Spearmint [87], Phoenics, [35] and BoTorch [3]), each with unique strengths tailored to specific use cases. Further-more, although BO embodies a natural computational alignment with the hypothetico-deductive scientific method and delivers unparalleled sample efficiency for expensive black-box functions—the dominant scenario in experimental science—it is not universally the optimal algorithmic choice. In settings where the objective function can be evaluated cheaply and rapidly, or where non-black-box information (e.g., gradient signals, known physical constraints, or partial mechanistic understanding) is available, alternative paradigms (e.g., gradient-based methods, evolutionary algorithms, or physics-informed optimization) may offer superior computational efficiency or final performance. On the surrogate modeling front, our focus on standard Gaussian processes (GPs) entails practical computational constraints: the cubic O(n3) complexity of exact GP inference restricts its application to small-to-medium datasets (typically n ≲ 10 3), making it poorly suited for large-scale, data-rich scientific scenarios generated by high-throughput experimentation. While we explicitly note this limitation, we do not provide detailed coverage of advanced mitiga-tion strategies, such as sparse GP approximations, variational inference, or scalable non-GP surrogate models (e.g., Bayesian neural networks, random forests, or deep kernel learning), yet these advances are critical for extending BO to high-data regimes. 61 BO Tutorial Finally, many technical extensions of high relevance to scientific discovery, including multi-objective optimization, non-myopic look-ahead acquisition functions, and the deep integration of domain-specific prior knowledge, are only introduced at a conceptual level, with limited discussion of their mathematical foundations or hands-on implementa-tion. These topics represent rich avenues for further exploration beyond the scope of this tutorial. 

21.2 Future Vision 

Looking to the future, we envision a roadmap for the development and adoption of BO in scientific research that spans from near-term practical improvements to long-term paradigm shifts. In the near term, the most urgent priority is lowering the barrier to BO adoption for experimental scientists, through the development of domain-specialised BO toolkits with built-in domain knowledge (e.g., molecular descriptors, material feature engineering, reaction kinet-ics priors) that eliminate the need for manual feature engineering, and through native integration of BO workflows with common laboratory automation tools, including flow chemistry systems, robotic synthesis platforms, and high-throughput characterisation equipment. Thereby, we may enable a fully closed loop of experimental design, execution, data analysis, and iterative optimisation without human intervention. We also aim to develop practical, user-friendly tools for multi-objective BO, which is critical for real-world scientific research where multiple competing objectives (e.g., catalyst activity, stability, and cost) must be balanced. In the mid term, we see significant opportunities for methodological innovation to address the limitations of current BO methods in complex scientific settings. This includes 1) the deep integration of first-principles domain knowledge into surrogate models (e.g., physics-informed neural networks, mechanistic priors in Gaussian processes) to further improve sample efficiency in data-scarce scenarios and ensure consistency with fundamental scientific laws; 2) the development of robust human-in-the-loop BO frameworks that allow domain experts to inject constraints, prioritise regions of interest, and validate algorithmic suggestions, while also explaining why a particular experiment is rec-ommended; and 3) the design of BO methods that natively handle non-ideal experimental scenarios, including noisy measurements, failed runs, batch effects, and contextual disturbances. In the long term, we believe that BO will be a foundational component of a new paradigm of open, collaborative, and autonomous scientific discovery. Combined with large language models for literature mining and knowledge reason-ing, and robotic systems for experimental execution, BO will act as the “experimental design brain” of end-to-end scientific AI agents. These agents will be able to autonomously formulate scientific hypotheses, design and execute experiments to test them, analyse results, and refine hypotheses, accelerating the pace of discovery in ways not possi-ble with human-only research. We also envision the development of meta-learning BO frameworks that can transfer optimisation knowledge from one scientific domain to another, solving the cold-start problem for novel research ques-tions. Furthermore, we also appeal for a shared, open database of BO experimental results across laboratories, where pre-trained surrogate models can be fine-tuned on new datasets, fostering a positive feedback loop of data, model improvement, and faster discovery. Finally, we are committed to maintaining this tutorial as a living document that evolves alongside advances in BO methodology and scientific infrastructure. Future updates will include additional case studies in diverse fields, such as battery science, synthetic biology, quantum computing, and climate science. In addition, advanced topics such as multi-fidelity BO, multi-task BO, and LLM-augmented BO will be covered to support the practical deployment of BO workflows in real-world laboratory settings. Our ultimate goal is to make principled, efficient experimental design accessible to every scientific researcher, unlocking the full potential of data-driven scientific discovery. 62 BO Tutorial 

## References 

[1] Masaki Adachi et al. “Looping in the Human: Collaborative and Explainable Bayesian Optimization”. In: 

Proceedings of The 27th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, Apr. 2024, pp. 505–513. [2] Peter Auer. “Using Confidence Bounds for Exploitation-Exploration Trade-offs”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 3.Nov (2002), pp. 397–422. ISSN : ISSN 1533-7928. [3] Maximilian Balandat et al. “BoTorch: A framework for efficient Monte-Carlo Bayesian optimization”. In: 

Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), pp. 21524–21538. [4] Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. “Max-Value Entropy Search for Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [5] James Bergstra, Dan Yamins, and David Cox. “Hyperopt: A Python Library for Optimizing the Hyperparam-eters of Machine Learning Algorithms”. In: Python in Science Conference . Austin, Texas, 2013, pp. 13–19. 

> DOI

: 10.25080/Majora-8b375195-003 .[6] James Bergstra et al. “Algorithms for Hyper-Parameter Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 24. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011. [7] G. Richard Bickerton et al. “Quantifying the Chemical Beauty of Drugs”. In: Nature Chemistry 4.2 (Feb. 2012), pp. 90–98. ISSN : 1755-4330, 1755-4349. DOI : 10.1038/nchem.1243 .[8] G. E. P. Box and D. R. Cox. “An Analysis of Transformations”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 26.2 (Dec. 2018), pp. 211–243. ISSN : 0035-9246. DOI : 10.1111/j.2517-6161. 1964.tb00553.x . eprint: https://academic.oup.com/jrsssb/article-pdf/26/2/211/49099371/ jrsssb_26_2_211.pdf . URL : https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1964.tb00553.x .[9] Benjamin Burger et al. “A Mobile Robotic Chemist”. In: Nature 583.7815 (July 2020), pp. 237–241. ISSN :0028-0836, 1476-4687. DOI : 10.1038/s41586-020-2442-2 .[10] Xu Cai and Jonathan Scarlett. On Lower Bounds for Standard and Robust Gaussian Process Bandit Optimiza-tion . May 2021. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2008.08757 . arXiv: 2008.08757 [stat] .[11] Guojin Chen et al. LLM-Enhanced Bayesian Optimization for Efficient Analog Layout Constraint Generation .Dec. 2024. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2406.05250 . arXiv: 2406.05250 [cs] .[12] Clément Chevalier and David Ginsbourger. “Fast Computation of the Multi-Points Expected Improvement with Applications in Batch Selection”. In: Learning and Intelligent Optimization . Ed. by Giuseppe Nicosia and Panos Pardalos. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2013, pp. 59–69. ISBN : 978-3-642-44973-4. DOI : 10.1007/ 978-3-642-44973-4_7 .[13] Abdoulatif Cissé et al. Language-Based Bayesian Optimization Research Assistant (BORA) . Jan. 2025. DOI :

10.48550/arXiv.2501.16224 . arXiv: 2501.16224 [cs] .[14] Samantha Copeland. “On Serendipity in Science: Discovery at the Intersection of Chance and Wisdom”. In: 

Synthese 196.6 (June 1, 2019), pp. 2385–2406. ISSN : 1573-0964. DOI : 10.1007/s11229-017-1544-3 .[15] Alexander I. Cowen-Rivers et al. HEBO: Pushing The Limits of Sample-Efficient Hyperparameter Optimisa-tion . May 2022. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2012.03826 . arXiv: 2012.03826 [cs] .[16] Zhongxiang Dai et al. “Bayesian Optimization Meets Bayesian Optimal Stopping”. In: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, May 2019, pp. 1496–1506. [17] Valentin Dalibard, Michael Schaarschmidt, and Eiko Yoneki. “BOAT: Building Auto-Tuners with Structured Bayesian Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web . Perth Australia: International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, Apr. 2017, pp. 479–488. ISBN :978-1-4503-4913-0. DOI : 10.1145/3038912.3052662 .[18] Samuel Daulton et al. Robust Multi-Objective Bayesian Optimization Under Input Noise . June 2022. DOI :

10.48550/arXiv.2202.07549 . arXiv: 2202.07549 [cs] .[19] Josip Djolonga, Andreas Krause, and Volkan Cevher. “High-Dimensional Gaussian Process Bandits”. In: Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. [20] David Duvenaud et al. Structure Discovery in Nonparametric Regression through Compositional Kernel Search . May 2013. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.1302.4922 . arXiv: 1302.4922 [stat] .[21] David Eriksson et al. “Scalable Global Optimization via Local Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [22] Peter I. Frazier. A Tutorial on Bayesian Optimization . July 2018. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.1807.02811 . arXiv: 

1807.02811 [stat] .63 BO Tutorial [23] Wenhao Gao et al. Sample Efficiency Matters: A Benchmark for Practical Molecular Optimization . Oct. 2022. 

> DOI

: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.12411 . arXiv: 2206.12411 [cs] .[24] Jacob Gardner et al. “Bayesian Optimization with Inequality Constraints”. In: Proceedings of the 31st Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, June 2014, pp. 937–945. [25] Jacob Gardner et al. “GPyTorch: Blackbox Matrix-Matrix Gaussian Process Inference with GPU Accelera-tion”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. [26] Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2023. [27] David Ginsbourger, Rodolphe Le Riche, and Laurent Carraro. “Kriging Is Well-Suited to Parallelize Optimiza-tion”. In: Computational Intelligence in Expensive Optimization Problems . Ed. by Yoel Tenne and Chi-Keong Goh. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 131–162. ISBN : 978-3-642-10701-6. DOI : 10.1007/978- 3-642-10701-6_6 .[28] David Ginsbourger, Rodolphe Le Riche, and Laurent Carraro. A Multi-points Criterion for Deterministic Par-allel Global Optimization Based on Gaussian Processes . Report. Mar. 2008. [29] Laurent Gomez. “Decision Making in Medicinal Chemistry: The Power of Our Intuition”. In: ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters 9.10 (Oct. 11, 2018), pp. 956–958. DOI : 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.8b00359 .[30] Javier Gonzalez, Michael Osborne, and Neil Lawrence. “GLASSES: Relieving The Myopia Of Bayesian Opti-misation”. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, May 2016, pp. 790–799. [31] Javier Gonzalez et al. “Batch Bayesian Optimization via Local Penalization”. In: Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, May 2016, pp. 648–657. [32] Miguel González-Duque et al. A Survey and Benchmark of High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization of Dis-crete Sequences . Nov. 2024. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2406.04739 . arXiv: 2406.04739 [cs] .[33] Robert B. Gramacy and Herbert K. H. Lee. “Optimization Under Unknown Constraints”. In: Bayesian Statis-tics 9 . Ed. by José M. Bernardo et al. Oxford University Press, Oct. 2011, pp. 229–256. ISBN : 978-0-19-969458-7. DOI : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199694587.003.0008 .[34] Florian Häse et al. “Gryffin: An Algorithm for Bayesian Optimization of Categorical Variables Informed by Expert Knowledge”. In: Applied Physics Reviews 8.3 (Sept. 2021), p. 031406. ISSN : 1931-9401. DOI : 10 . 1063/5.0048164 . arXiv: 2003.12127 [stat] .[35] Florian Häse et al. “Phoenics: A Bayesian Optimizer for Chemistry”. In: ACS Central Science 4.9 (Sept. 2018), pp. 1134–1145. ISSN : 2374-7943, 2374-7951. DOI : 10.1021/acscentsci.8b00307 .[36] James Hensman et al. “MCMC for Variationally Sparse Gaussian Processes”. In: Advances in Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems . Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. [37] Brian Hepburn and Hanne Andersen. “Scientific Method”. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Ed. by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. Spring 2026. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2026. [38] Trong Nghia Hoang et al. “Decentralized High-Dimensional Bayesian Optimization With Factor Graphs”. In: 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . Vol. 32. Apr. 2018. DOI : 10 . 1609 / aaai . v32i1.11788 .[39] Matthew W Hoffman and Bobak Shahriari. “Modular Mechanisms for Bayesian Optimization”. In: Bayesian Optimization in Academia and Industry, NeurIPS 2014 Workshop . 2014. [40] Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. “Sequential Model-Based Optimization for General Algorithm Configuration”. In: Learning and Intelligent Optimization . Ed. by Carlos A. Coello Coello. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2011, pp. 507–523. ISBN : 978-3-642-25566-3. DOI : 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 25566-3_40 .[41] John J. Irwin et al. “ZINC20—A Free Ultralarge-Scale Chemical Database for Ligand Discovery”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling 60.12 (Dec. 2020), pp. 6065–6073. ISSN : 1549-9596, 1549-960X. DOI :

10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00675 .[42] Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. “Efficient Global Optimization of Expensive Black-Box Functions”. In: Journal of Global Optimization 13.4 (Dec. 1998), pp. 455–492. ISSN : 1573-2916. 

> DOI

: 10.1023/A:1008306431147 .[43] Asif Khan et al. AntBO: Towards Real-World Automated Antibody Design with Combinatorial Bayesian Opti-misation . 2022. arXiv: 2201.12570 [q-bio.BM] . URL : https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12570 .[44] Andreas Krause and Cheng Ong. “Contextual Gaussian Process Bandit Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 24. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011. [45] D. Krige. “A Statistical Approach to Some Basic Mine Valuation Problems on the Witwatersrand”. In: Journal of The South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (Dec. 1951). 64 BO Tutorial [46] Agustinus Kristiadi et al. How Useful Is Intermittent, Asynchronous Expert Feedback for Bayesian Optimiza-tion? June 2024. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2406.06459 . arXiv: 2406.06459 [cs] .[47] Thomas S. Kuhn. “Historical Structure of Scientific Discovery: To the Historian Discovery Is Seldom a Unit Event Attributable to Some Particular Man, Time, and Place.” In: Science 136.3518 (June 1962), pp. 760–764. 

> ISSN

: 0036-8075, 1095-9203. DOI : 10.1126/science.136.3518.760 .[48] Thomas S. Kuhn. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . 2. ed., enlarged, 21. print. International Encyclopedia of Unified Science 2,2. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1994. ISBN : 978-0-226-45803-8. [49] Ponnambalam Kumaraswamy. “A generalized probability density function for double-bounded random pro-cesses”. In: Journal of hydrology 46.1-2 (1980), pp. 79–88. [50] H. J. Kushner. “A New Method of Locating the Maximum Point of an Arbitrary Multipeak Curve in the Presence of Noise”. In: Journal of Basic Engineering 86.1 (Mar. 1964), pp. 97–106. ISSN : 0021-9223. DOI :

10.1115/1.3653121 .[51] Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit Algorithms . 1st ed. Cambridge University Press, July 2020. ISBN :978-1-108-57140-1. DOI : 10.1017/9781108571401 .[52] Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla et al. “Sparse Spectrum Gaussian Process Regression”. In: Journal of Machine Learn-ing Research 11 (2010), pp. 1865–1881. [53] Bowen Lei et al. “Bayesian Optimization with Adaptive Surrogate Models for Automated Experimental De-sign”. In: npj Computational Materials 7.1 (Dec. 2021), p. 194. ISSN : 2057-3960. DOI : 10.1038/s41524-021-00662-x .[54] Chunyuan Li et al. “Preconditioned Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics for Deep Neural Networks”. In: 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . Vol. 30. Feb. 2016. DOI : 10 . 1609 / aaai . v30i1.10200 .[55] Jun Li and Martin D. Eastgate. “Current Complexity: A Tool for Assessing the Complexity of Organic Molecules”. In: Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry 13.26 (2015), pp. 7164–7176. ISSN : 1477-0520. DOI :

10.1039/C5OB00709G .[56] Qiaohao Liang et al. “Benchmarking the Performance of Bayesian Optimization across Multiple Experimental Materials Science Domains”. In: npj Computational Materials 7.1 (Nov. 2021), p. 188. ISSN : 2057-3960. DOI :

10.1038/s41524-021-00656-9 .[57] Hanti Lin. “Bayesian Epistemology”. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Ed. by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. Summer 2024. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2024. [58] Tennison Liu et al. Large Language Models to Enhance Bayesian Optimization . Mar. 2024. DOI : 10.48550/ arXiv.2402.03921 . arXiv: 2402.03921 [cs] .[59] Huma Lodhi et al. “Text Classification Using String Kernels”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 13. MIT Press, 2000. [60] B. P. MacLeod et al. “Self-Driving Laboratory for Accelerated Discovery of Thin-Film Materials”. In: Science Advances 6.20 (May 2020), eaaz8867. DOI : 10.1126/sciadv.aaz8867 .[61] Kanan Mahammadli and Seyda Ertekin. Sequential Large Language Model-Based Hyper-parameter Optimiza-tion . Jan. 2025. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2410.20302 . arXiv: 2410.20302 [cs] .[62] J. Mockus. “On the Bayes Methods for Seeking the Extremal Point”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 8.1 (Aug. 1975), pp. 428–431. ISSN : 14746670. DOI : 10.1016/S1474-6670(17)67769-3 .[63] Henry Moss et al. “BOSS: Bayesian Optimization over String Spaces”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 33. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 15476–15486. [64] Samuel Müller et al. “PFNs4BO: In-Context Learning for Bayesian Optimization”. In: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, July 2023, pp. 25444–25470. [65] Kevin P. Murphy. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective . 4. print. (fixed many typos). Adaptive Com-putation and Machine Learning Series. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2013. ISBN : 978-0-262-01802-9. [66] Radford M. Neal. Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks . Ed. by P. Bickel et al. Vol. 118. Lecture Notes in Statistics. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1996. ISBN : 978-0-387-94724-2. DOI : 10.1007/978-1-4612-0745-0 .[67] Shunta Nishioka et al. “Photocatalytic Water Splitting”. In: Nature Reviews Methods Primers 3.1 (June 2023), p. 42. ISSN : 2662-8449. DOI : 10.1038/s43586-023-00226-x .[68] Jorge Nocedal and Stephen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization . Second edition. Springer Series in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. New York, NY: Springer, 2006. ISBN : 978-0-387-30303-1. [69] Fernando Nogueira. Bayesian Optimization: A Python Implementation of Global Optimization with Gaussian Processes. https://github.com/bayesian-optimization/BayesianOptimization. 2014. 65 BO Tutorial [70] F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830. [71] Victor Picheny et al. “Bayesian Optimization under Mixed Constraints with a Slack-Variable Augmented La-grangian”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. [72] Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett. “Data Science and Its Relationship to Big Data and Data-Driven Decision Making”. In: Big Data 1.1 (Mar. 1, 2013), pp. 51–59. ISSN : 2167-6461. DOI : 10.1089/big.2013.1508 .[73] Tom Rainforth et al. Modern Bayesian Experimental Design . Nov. 2023. DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2302 . 14545 . arXiv: 2302.14545 [stat] .[74] Mayk Caldas Ramos et al. Bayesian Optimization of Catalysis With In-Context Learning . May 2025. DOI :

10.48550/arXiv.2304.05341 . arXiv: 2304.05341 [physics] .[75] RDKit: Open-Source Cheminformatics Software . https://www.rdkit.org/. [76] Daniel Russo et al. A Tutorial on Thompson Sampling . July 2020. DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 1707 . 02038 .arXiv: 1707.02038 [cs] .[77] Tom Savage and Ehecatl Antonio del Rio Chanona. “Expert-Guided Bayesian Optimisation for Human-in-the-loop Experimental Design of Known Systems”. In: NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on Adaptive Experimental Design and Active Learning in the Real World . arXiv, Dec. 2023. DOI : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2312 . 02852 .arXiv: 2312.02852 [cs] .[78] Samuel Schindler. “Scientific Discovery: That-Whats and What-Thats”. In: Ergo, an Open Access Journal of Philosophy 2 (2015). ISSN : 2330-4014. DOI : 10.3998/ergo.12405314.0002.006 . HDL: 2027/spo. 12405314.0002.006 .[79] Warren Scott, Peter Frazier, and Warren Powell. “The Correlated Knowledge Gradient for Simulation Opti-mization of Continuous Parameters Using Gaussian Process Regression”. In: SIAM Journal on Optimization 

21.3 (July 2011), pp. 996–1026. ISSN : 1052-6234. DOI : 10.1137/100801275 .[80] Amar Shah and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Parallel Predictive Entropy Search for Batch Global Optimization of Expensive Objective Functions”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 28. Curran Associates, Inc., 2015. [81] Amar Shah, Andrew Wilson, and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Student-t Processes as Alternatives to Gaussian Pro-cesses”. In: Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .PMLR, Apr. 2014, pp. 877–885. [82] Bobak Shahriari et al. “Taking the Human Out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization”. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE 104.1 (Jan. 2016), pp. 148–175. ISSN : 1558-2256. DOI : 10.1109/JPROC.2015.2494218 .[83] Benjamin J. Shields et al. “Bayesian Reaction Optimization as a Tool for Chemical Synthesis”. In: Nature 

590.7844 (Feb. 2021), pp. 89–96. ISSN : 0028-0836, 1476-4687. DOI : 10.1038/s41586-021-03213-y .[84] Ahmed Shoyeb Raihan et al. “Accelerating Material Discovery with a Threshold-Driven Hybrid Acquisition Policy-Based Bayesian Optimization”. In: Manufacturing Letters . 52nd SME North American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC 52) 41 (Oct. 2024), pp. 1300–1311. ISSN : 2213-8463. DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . mfglet.2024.09.157 .[85] Edward Snelson and Zoubin Ghahramani. “Sparse Gaussian Processes Using Pseudo-inputs”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 18. MIT Press, 2005. [86] Edward Snelson, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Carl Rasmussen. “Warped Gaussian Processes”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Ed. by S. Thrun, L. Saul, and B. Schölkopf. Vol. 16. MIT Press, 2003. URL : https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper _ files / paper / 2003 / file / 6b5754d737784b51ec5075c0dc437bf0-Paper.pdf .[87] Jasper Snoek. JasperSnoek/spearmint . 2015. [88] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. “Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 25 (2012). [89] Jost Tobias Springenberg et al. “Bayesian Optimization with Robust Bayesian Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. [90] Niranjan Srinivas et al. “Gaussian Process Optimization in the Bandit Setting: No Regret and Experimental Design”. In: Proceedings of the 27 Th International Conference on Machine Learning . Haifa, Isreal, 2010. [91] Niranjan Srinivas et al. “Information-Theoretic Regret Bounds for Gaussian Process Optimization in the Ban-dit Setting”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 58.5 (May 2012), pp. 3250–3265. ISSN : 1557-9654. 

> DOI

: 10.1109/TIT.2011.2182033 .[92] Simon Streltsov and Pirooz Vakili. “A Non-myopic Utility Function for Statistical Global Optimization Algo-rithms”. In: Journal of Global Optimization 14.3 (May 1999), pp. 283–298. ISSN : 1573-2916. DOI : 10.1023/ A:1008284229931 .66 BO Tutorial [93] Sara Szymku, Tomasz Badowski, and Bartosz A. Grzybowski. “Is Organic Chemistry Really Growing Expo-nentially?” In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 60.50 (2021), pp. 26226–26232. ISSN : 1521-3773. 

> DOI

: 10.1002/anie.202111540 . URL : https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/anie. 202111540 .[94] Zhenzhi Tan, Qi Yang, and Sanzhong Luo. “AI Molecular Catalysis: Where Are We Now?” In: Organic Chemistry Frontiers 12.8 (Apr. 8, 2025), pp. 2759–2776. ISSN : 2052-4129. DOI : 10.1039/D4QO02363C . URL :

https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2025/qo/d4qo02363c .[95] Mattias Teye, Hossein Azizpour, and Kevin Smith. “Bayesian Uncertainty Estimation for Batch Normalized Deep Networks”. In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, July 2018, pp. 4907–4916. [96] Jose Antonio Garrido Torres et al. “A Multi-Objective Active Learning Platform and Web App for Reaction Optimization”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 144.43 (Nov. 2, 2022), pp. 19999–20007. ISSN :0002-7863. DOI : 10.1021/jacs.2c08592 .[97] Dustin Tran, Rajesh Ranganath, and David M. Blei. The Variational Gaussian Process . Apr. 2016. DOI : 10. 48550/arXiv.1511.06499 . arXiv: 1511.06499 [stat] .[98] Sattar Vakili, Kia Khezeli, and Victor Picheny. “On Information Gain and Regret Bounds in Gaussian Process Bandits”. In: Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, Mar. 2021, pp. 82–90. [99] Xilu Wang et al. Recent Advances in Bayesian Optimization . Nov. 2022. DOI : 10.48550/arXiv.2206.03301 .arXiv: 2206.03301 [cs] .[100] Zi Wang and Stefanie Jegelka. “Max-Value Entropy Search for Efficient Bayesian Optimization”. In: Proceed-ings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, July 2017, pp. 3627–3635. [101] Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning . Vol. 2. 3. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006. [102] James Wilson, Frank Hutter, and Marc Deisenroth. “Maximizing Acquisition Functions for Bayesian Opti-mization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. [103] Martin Wistuba and Josif Grabocka. Few-Shot Bayesian Optimization with Deep Kernel Surrogates . Jan. 2021. 

> DOI

: 10.48550/arXiv.2101.07667 . arXiv: 2101.07667 [cs] .[104] Jian Wu and Peter Frazier. “Practical Two-Step Lookahead Bayesian Optimization”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. [105] Jian Wu and Peter Frazier. “The Parallel Knowledge Gradient Method for Batch Bayesian Optimization”. In: 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . Vol. 29. Curran Associates, Inc., 2016. [106] Yifan Wu, Aron Walsh, and Alex M. Ganose. “Race to the Bottom: Bayesian Optimisation for Chemical Problems”. In: Digital Discovery 3.6 (2024), pp. 1086–1100. ISSN : 2635-098X. DOI : 10.1039/D3DD00234A .[107] Zikai Xie et al. Domain Knowledge Injection in Bayesian Search for New Materials . Nov. 2023. DOI : 10 . 3233/FAIA230587 . arXiv: 2311.15162 [cs] .[108] Wenjie Xu et al. “Principled Bayesian Optimisation in Collaboration with Human Experts”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems . 2024. [109] Kaifeng Yang et al. “Multi-Objective Bayesian Global Optimization Using Expected Hypervolume Improve-ment Gradient”. In: Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 44 (Feb. 2019), pp. 945–956. ISSN : 2210-6502. 

> DOI

: 10.1016/j.swevo.2018.10.007 .[110] In-Kwon Yeo and Richard A Johnson. “A new family of power transformations to improve normality or symmetry”. In: Biometrika 87.4 (2000), pp. 954–959. [111] Xubo Yue and Raed AL Kontar. “Why Non-myopic Bayesian Optimization Is Promising and How Far Should We Look-ahead? A Study via Rollout”. In: Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics . PMLR, June 2020, pp. 2808–2818. [112] Qingfu Zhang et al. “Expensive Multiobjective Optimization by MOEA/D With Gaussian Process Model”. In: IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 14.3 (June 2010), pp. 456–474. ISSN : 1941-0026. DOI :

10.1109/TEVC.2009.2033671 .[113] A. G. Zhilinskas. “Single-Step Bayesian Search Method for an Extremum of Functions of a Single Variable”. In: Cybernetics 11.1 (1976), pp. 160–166. ISSN : 0011-4235, 1573-8337. DOI : 10.1007/BF01069961 .67