Title: 2604.03481v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03481v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:13:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 42

Markdown Content:
Lattice -Boltzmann -Driven Physics -Informed Neural Networks for Droplet 

# Wettability on Rough Surfaces 

Ganesh Sahadeo Meshram 1, Partha P Chakrabarti 2, Suman Chakraborty 1*

> 1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, 721302, India 

> 2

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, Kharag pur, 721302, India 

Corresponding Author: suman@mech.iitkgp.ac.in 

Abstract 

We introduce a Lattice -Boltzmann -driven kinetic physics -informed neural network (K -PINN) for 

predictive modeling of droplet dynamics on structured surfaces, in which the discrete Bo ltzmann -

BGK equation is incorporated into the learning framework. Different from traditional PINNs that are 

restricted by macroscopic continuum equations, the K -PINN framework is built on the mesoscopic 

kinetic level, in which the essential Lattice -Boltzma nn physics is preserved in the data -efficient neural 

network. The K -PINN has been successfully employed for modeling non -trivial droplet phenomena 

such as contact pinning, anisotropic spreading, and capillary hysteresis on substrates of different 

morpholog ies, ranging from random roughness to periodic pillar structures. Moreover, strict physical 

consistency, such as mass conservation within 1.5%, is ensured in the K -PINN framework. 

Furthermore, the U -Net -based encoder -decoder structure of the K -PINN results in a 50 -75% 

reduction in error compared to traditional neural networks, achieving almost perfect agreement with 

high -resolution Lattice -Boltzmann simulations L 2 ≈ 0.021 -0.026, R 2 ≈0.999. Robust convergence of 

the K -PINN to diverse surface morphologies is ensured through curriculum learning and adaptive 

two -phase optimization. Upon convergence, the K -PINN can perform real -time prediction with over 

10 4 evaluations per second. Through the combination of kinetic theory and physics -informed 

learning, this work establishes a new paradigm for fast, physically consistent modeling of multiphase 

flows on complex surfaces. 

1. Introduction 

In particular, the prediction of multiphase droplet dynamics on rough and structured surfaces is one 

of the fundamental challenges in the field of interfacial fluid mechanics with important applications 

to energy technologies, advanced surface engineering, biomedical diagnostics, and nano -micro 

fluidic devices. Fundamentally, the phenomenon is related to the complex interplay between surface morphology and its effects on local wettability, droplet contact lines, and the resulting contact -line 

dynamics. As such, the phenomenon is inherently multiscale, involving molecular, mesoscopic, and 

macroscopic effects. As such, the phenomenon is inherently incomplete if addressed using purely 

macroscopic approaches. In particular, the application of the Navier –Stokes equations, even with 

sophisticated contact angle and phase -field theories, is inherently limited in its ability to address 

contact -line pinning, surface roughness effects, and phase demixing on complex surfaces. By 

contrast, the Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM), which is now established as the state -of -the -art 

simulation tool for the study of multiphase droplet interactions with surface s, is based on the 

mesoscopic kinetic theory of fluids. As such, the model is naturally equipped to address complex 

interfacial effects, contact lines, and surface wettability using the Shan –Chen pseudopotential. 

Nevertheless, the mesoscopic nature of the model is accompanied by the high computational cost. 

Indeed, high -resolution LBM simulations scale poorly with geometric complexity, parameter space, 

and three -dimensionality. 

This dichotomy of physical fidelity vs. computational efficiency has fueled the rapid development of 

machine learning -based surrogates in fluid mechanics. Initially, convolutional neural networks and 

recurrent neural networks were employed for modeling the evolution of flows from large simulation 

data sets. Although these models have shown significant promise in improving prediction efficiency, 

they remain data -centric, often unstable outside of the original data regime, and ignorant of the 

underlying physical principles that govern multiphase flows. The development of physics -informed 

neural networks (PINNs) has marked a major leap forward in the development of neural networks for 

fluid mechanics problems. PINNs have successfully incorporated the underlying physical principles 

in the neural network architecture, minimizing data require ments and improving extrapolative 

robustness. PINNs have been successfully employed for simulating two -phase flows governed by the 

Navier -Stokes equations, phase -field models, and reactive transport problems. Even though PINNs 

have marked a major leap forw ard in simulating fluid mechanics problems, there remains a major 

limitation in PINN -based models. All PINN -based models have been restricted to enforcing physical 

principles at the macroscopic level. Thus, these models inherit the same blind spots as othe r

macroscopic -based models. They remain unable to capture mesoscopic effects such as the evolution 

of the distribution function, discrete forcing, and kinetic relaxation, which remain the key to 

understanding interfacial flows in LBM -based multiphase flows . In contrast, surrogate -based LBM 

models have been developed by ignoring the underlying physical principles. Thus, these models have 

shown limited generalizability for different surface morphologies and wettability regimes. 

Recent attempts at hybrid model ing fall in these two extremes. Data -driven surrogates based on 

learning from outputs of Lattice Boltzmann Methods replicate interface geometries without proper physical regularization, while continuum -level PINNs correctly mimic droplet spreading phenomen a

only on smooth surfaces. Most glaringly in the literature is a lack of a modeling framework in which 

the Lattice Boltzmann Equation itself is used as a physics surrogate as opposed to a macroscopic 

limit. To date, there has been no PINN formulation in wh ich the discrete Boltzmann -BGK Equation 

with mesoscopic forcing is incorporated as a physics principle in the surrogate, nor has there been 

one in which rough surfaces are considered in which kinetic effects dominate contact line phenomena 

due to a lack of smoothness in the surface topography. This is because, in reality, wetting phenomena 

on rough surfaces are not governed by continuum balance laws as in smooth surfaces; rather, kinetic 

effects due to particle interactions and discrete velocity effects inh erent in Lattice Boltzmann Methods 

play a significant role in contact line phenomena, and a lack of a modeling framework in which these 

physics are properly incorporated is a glaring bottleneck in advancing fast yet accurate surrogate 

models in droplet -sur face interactions. 

In this work, we close this gap by proposing a novel Lattice -Boltzmann -Driven Kinetic Physics -

Informed Neural Network (K -PINN), which incorporates the discrete Boltzmann -BGK equation and 

Shan -Chen pseudopotential method into a loss funct ion for the first time. The K -PINN framework is 

different from traditional PINNs and LB -based surrogates in that the kinetic information of the 

discrete Boltzmann equation is fully explored. The framework is based on a neural network that is 

trained to pre dict the mesoscopic particle distribution functions at any spatiotemporal points. The 

macroscopic density and velocity fields are reconstructed by summation of the predicted distribution 

functions. The K -PINN framework is validated by simulating the dynami cs of droplets on randomly 

rough and textured surfaces. The K -PINN framework is able to achieve a speedup of orders of 

magnitude compared to traditional LB methods while maintaining high accuracy in predicting the 

complex dynamics of droplets on randomly r ough and textured surfaces. The K -PINN framework is 

a new computational tool for complex multiphase wetting problems and is not a surrogate LB method 

or a traditional PINN. 

2. Method s

2.1 Why Kinetic PINNs? 

Kinetic PINNs thus bring a paradigm shift in the implementation of governing laws in learning 

schemes of multiphase flows. Indeed, these methodologies offer a significant extension of physics -

informed learning surrogates by considering conservation laws and constitutive equations at the 

kinetic level. Co nventional PINN schemes have mostly focused on anchoring themselves in 

macroscopic continuum laws, particularly in the form of the Navier -Stokes equations coupled with phase -field or sharp interface representations. Although these schemes have shown signif icant 

promise in modeling smooth interface problems and situations characterized by wetting heterogeneity 

of low amplitude, they are fundamentally inadequate in situations characterized by microscale surface 

roughness effects on droplet motion and interact ions. Indeed, in these situations, macroscopic PINN 

schemes are limited by their scale incompatibility in enforcing macroscopic balance laws based on 

local thermodynamic equilibrium assumptions and smooth constitutive relations, as opposed to 

kinetic effec ts in droplet -surface interactions characterized by discrete interfacial momentum transfer, 

nonlocal interparticle interactions, and kinetic relaxation towards thermodynamic equilibrium on a 

finite time scale of a lattice structure. These effects are parti cularly significant in situations 

characterized by contact line effects, confined geometries, and wettability transitions, in which 

conventional continuum PINN schemes are either inaccurate or require corrections. 

The lattice Boltzmann method (LBM) fills t his void by working at the kinetic level. Interfacial 

tension, phase segregation, and wettability naturally arise from the combination of the lattice 

Boltzmann equation and the forcing scheme (such as the Shan -Chen pseudopotential approach). Most 

important ly, these phenomena are not reducible to any closed -form macroscopic equation without 

compromising accuracy. Thus, by imposing a constraint on the macroscopic limits of the LBM within 

the PINN framework, we are ignoring the physical principles on which the LBM has been built to 

succeed in simulating multiphase flows in wetting phenomena. Kinetic PINNs address this limitation 

by promoting the discrete Boltzmann equation to the status of a constraint. Rather than learning 

velocity and pressure fields from the continuum equation, a kinetic PINN learns the evolution of 

particle distributions from the Boltzmann -BGK equation. Macroscopic variables are then recovered 

from these distributions. Thus, there is no longer a need for imposing a constraint on the macrosco pic 

limits of the LBM. Kinetic PINNs thus offer a distinct improvement over both PINNs and LBM -

based surrogates. 

From a learning viewpoint, kinetic enforcement has several crucial advantages. Firstly, it has a 

stronger inductive bias by more severely limit ing the hypothesis space, thus significantly improving 

generalization across surface morphologies and wettability regimes. Secondly, by enforcing 

conservation laws directly at the level of the distribution function, there is no need for any additional 

regu larization terms. Thirdly, kinetic PINNs naturally handle complex geometries and boundary 

conditions, which enter in a natural way in the form of streaming and forcing terms rather than being 

specified by geometric parameters. Most importantly, however, ki netic PINNs inherit a fundamental 

property of interfacial physics: contact line pinning, hysteresis effects, and anisotropy are not 

prescribed by empirical boundary conditions but rather emerge as a natural result of the learned 

kinetic physics. This makes kinetic PINNs particularly suitable for rough and structured surfaces, in which wettability is not a material parameter but rather a phenomenon that emerges as a result of 

complex interactions. In this sense, kinetic PINNs can be seen as neither an improv ement over the 

original continuum PINNs nor a compact alternative to the LBM. Rather, they propose a new 

paradigm for modeling, in which the learning is done at the same level as the best numerical 

approaches, yet with the efficiency and flexibility of the neural networks. By directly incorporating 

the physics at the mesoscopic level into the learning scheme, the kinetic PINNs overcome the long -

standing gap between high -fidelity multiphase simulations and fast predictive tools for complex 

wetting phenomena. 

2.2 Problem definition and computational domain 

Figure 1. Schematic of computational domain showing (a) stochastic rough surface and (b) periodic 

textured surface configurations with boundary conditions. 

To investigate droplet d ynamics on textured surfaces, w e consider a two -dimensional domain terms 

of lattice units Ω = {(𝑥 , 𝑦 ) ∣ 𝑥 ∈ [0, 𝐿 ], 𝑦 ∈ [0, 𝐻 ]}, with domain dimensions 𝐿 = 400Δ 𝑥 , 𝐻 =

200Δ 𝑥 , where Δ𝑥 is the lattice spacing. Time is discretized as Δ𝑡 = 1, and all quantities are expressed 

in lattice units unless stated otherwise. The flow is modeled using the D2Q9 latt ice, where the discrete 

velocity set is 0 0 01 0 0 1 1 41 1 5 8

> i

( , ), ic ( , ),( , ), i( , ), i

==   = −   = −

(1)

The computational domain contains three phases , l iquid phase (droplet) with density 𝜌 𝑙 = 6.5, gas 

phase (air) with density 𝜌 𝑔 = 0.38 , solid phase representing either stochastic roughness or periodic textures. The density ratio 𝜌 𝑙 /𝜌 𝑔 ≈ 17 allows stable interface capturing while maintaining numerical 

robustness in the Shan -Chen framework [45], [50], [51] . The l attice Boltzmann equation with BGK 

collision operator with evolution of the particle distribution function 𝑓 𝑖 (𝐱 , 𝑡 ) is governed by ( )

1 eq i i i i i if x c t,t t f ( x,t ) f ( x,t ) f ( ,u ) tF 





   + + = − − + 

(2)

Where 𝜏 = 1.0 is the relaxation time , 𝑓 𝑖  

> eq

is the second -order equilibrium distribution, 𝐹 𝑖 accounts 

for intermolecular and fluid -solid forces. The equilibrium distrib ution is ( )   

> 22242

1 2 2    

> eq iiiisss

c uc u uf w c c c



 = + + −   

(3)

with lattice sound speed 𝑐 𝑠 = 1/√3 and weights 𝑤 0 = 4 

> 9

, 𝑤 1−4 = 1 

> 9

, 𝑤 5−8 = 1

> 36

. Th e macroscopic 

fields can be extract using 2   

> iiiii

tf , u f c F





= = + 

(4)

where 𝐅 is the total force , t he kinematic viscosity is 𝜈 = 𝜏 −0.5 

> 3↓

= 0.167 , p hase separation and surface 

tension arise from the Shan -Chen pseudopotential interaction, defined as ( )( )ff i i ii

F ( x ) G ( ( x )) w x c c

##   = − +

(5)

where , 𝐺 < 0 is the attractive interaction strength, 𝜓 (𝜌 ) is the pseudopotential function. A commonly 

adopted form is 𝜓 (𝜌 ) = 𝜌 0(1 − 𝑒 −𝜌 /𝜌 0 ), 𝜌 0 = 1 which ensures nonlinear cohesion and stable phase 

coexistence. This force induces a non -ide al equation of state, 𝑝 = 𝑐 𝑠 

> 2

𝜌 + 𝐺  

> 2

𝑐 𝑠 

> 2

𝜓 2 leading to 

spontaneous liquid -gas separation and a diffuse interface of thickness 𝒪 (4 − 6Δ 𝑥 ).

The surface tension 𝜎 = 0.15 is verified independently by simulating a static droplet and applying 

Lapla ce's law, Δ𝑝 = 𝜎  

> 𝑅

where 𝑅 is the droplet radius. Wettability is imposed via a fluid -solid 

interaction force ( )    

> fs ads iiii

F ( x ) G ( ( x )) w s x c c

 

= − +

(6)

Where , 𝐺 ads is the adhesion strength, 𝑠 (𝐱 ) = 1 for solid nodes and 0 for fluid nodes. The equilibrium 

contact angle 𝜃 𝑐 emerges naturally from the balance of surface energies cos 𝜃 𝑐 = 𝛾 𝑠𝑔 −𝛾 𝑠𝑙 

> 𝛾 𝑙𝑔

, where 𝛾 𝑠𝑔 , 𝛾 𝑠𝑙 , and 𝛾 𝑙𝑔 are solid -gas, solid -liquid, and liquid -gas surface tensions, respectively. In the Shan -

Chen framework, these surface energies are implicitly controlled by 𝐺 ads . By varying 𝐺 ads ∈

[−1.25 , −2.75 ], we obtain contact angles ranging from 𝜃 𝑐 ≈ 60 ∘ (hydrophilic) to 𝜃 𝑐 ≈

150 ∘ (superhydrophobic). The periodic surface consists of rectangular pillars with , w idth 𝑤 = 8Δ 𝑥 ,

height ℎ = 10Δ 𝑥 , and p itch 𝑝 = 20Δ 𝑥 . The solid fraction is 𝜙 𝑠 = 𝑤  

> 𝑝

= 0.4. This geometry allows 

comparison w ith classical wetting theories , with Wenzel’s sta te cos 𝜃 𝑊 = 𝑟 cos 𝜃 𝑌 , where 𝑟 is the 

roughness ratio. And C assie -Baxter state , cos 𝜃 𝐶𝐵 = 𝜙 𝑠 (cos 𝜃 𝑌 + 1) − 1.

2. 3 Boundary Condition s

In the LBM framework, the fractal rough surface is emb edded by flagging lattice nodes satisfying 

𝑦 ≤ ℎ(𝑥 ) ⇒ solid node, while nodes with 𝑦 > ℎ(𝑥 ) are treated as fluid. At all solid nodes, a bounce -

back boundary condition is imposed to enforce the no -slip constraint at the fluid -solid interface. For 

each discr ete velocity direction 𝑖 , the distribution function satisfies ( ) ( )   

> iwıw

f x ,t t f x ,t + =

(7)

where 𝐱 𝑤 denotes a solid boundary node and 𝑖 ‾ is the opposite lattice direction of 𝑖 . This condition 

ensures that the macroscopic velocity at the rough wall satisfies 𝐮 |wall = 0, independent of the local 

surface slope or curvature. For the fractal rough geometry, the bounce -back rule is app lied locally at 

each solid -fluid interface node, allowing the effective wall shape to be resolved at lattice accuracy. 

The hydrodynamic coupling between the droplet and the surface is described by the combined effects 

of geometric confinement caused by the W-M surface geometry and fluid -solid pseudo -potential 

interactions, which dictate the fluid wettability. This model is consistent with the conservation of 

momentum and provides a strong representation of the no -slip condition even for highly irregular 

sur faces with multiscale roughness. At time t = 0, the circular droplet with radius r 0 = 40 Δx is set with 

its center located 2Δ x above the tallest surface feature. The velocity field is initially set to zero, 

u(x,y)=(0,0). The periodic BCs at left, right, and top boundaries can be represented as i if (x=0, y, t)=f (x=L, y, t) 

(8)

eliminating finite -size effects. 

2.4 Surface Geometry Modeling 

To more accurately characterize unstructured and multi -scale surface roughness compared to a 

Gaussian random field, the surface roughness on the bottom surface is modeled by a Weierstrass -

Mandelbrot fractal function, a popular form used to characterize self -affine surfaces commonly encountered in etched, corroded, and naturally rough materials [48]. The surface roughness profile is 

defined by y = h(x), and the height function h(x) is given by: 20 2    

> max min
> nn( D ) nnnnx

xh( x ) h A cos L

  

> −−−

 = + +  

# 

(9)

Here, ℎ0 denotes the mean surface height, 𝐴 is the roughness amplitude, and 𝐷 is the fractal dimension 

satisfying 1 < 𝐷 < 2, which controls the degree of surface irregularity. The parameter 𝛾 > 1 is the 

frequency scaling factor, typically chosen in the range 1.2 ≤ 𝛾 ≤ 1.6, while 𝜙 𝑛 ∈ [0,2𝜋 ] are random 

phase shifts uniformly distributed to ensure stochasticity. The summation limits 𝑛 min and 𝑛 max define 

the smallest and largest roughness wavelengths resolved on the lattice, constrained by the domain 

size 𝐿 𝑥 and the lattice spacing Δ𝑥 . The root -mean -square surface roughness of the fractal surface is 

given by 𝜎 rms = √⟨(ℎ(𝑥 ) − ℎ0)2⟩ and is controlled by parameter A, setting 𝜎 rms = 2.5Δ 𝑥 as in the 

Gaussian surface roughness model [6]. The su rface height is limited by ℎmin = 2Δ 𝑥 ≤ ℎ(𝑥 ) ≤

ℎmax = 10Δ 𝑥 by scaling parameter A appropriately. The fractal surface naturally includes asperities 

of varying scales, which play a significant role in determining contact line motion. Physically, the 

fracta l surface represents a actual surface roughness encountered in engineering systems 

characterized by scale invariance and a non -uniform asperity height distribution. The multi -scale 

surface roughness gives rise to a high energy barrier in droplet spreading and a high level of 

intermittency in contact line motion, which cannot be simulated by a simple surface roughness model. 

2.5 LBM -Driven -Kinetic -PINNs 

The Lattice -Boltzmann -driven -kinetic -physics -informed neural network (K -PINN) is implemented 

using two dis tinct neural network architectures to address different aspects of multiphase flow 

modeling, as illustrated in  Figure 2 and  Figure 3. Figure 2 employs a deep feedforward neural 

network with an input layer accepting spatiotemporal coordinates (x,y,t), eight hidden layers with 100 

neurons each, and an output layer producing nine scalar values corresponding to the D2Q9 lattice 

distribut ion functions fi (i=0,1,...,8). The network processes inputs through successive hidden layers 

using the hyperbolic tangent activation function tanh( )        

> zzzz
> eezee
> −−
> −=+

, which maps values to [−1,1] and 

ensures smooth gradient flow during backpropagation [52] . The output layer employs a softplus 

transformation to enforce non -negativity ( 0if  ), maintaining the physical interpretation of fi as 

particle densities. The architecture outputs both the predicted distribution functions and their 

equilibrium counterparts ( eq if ), which are subsequently used to compute the physics residual in the 

loss function. Figure 2. Architecture of the feed -forward PINN framework for Lattice -Boltzmann -driven 

multiphase modeling. 

From the predicted distribution functi ons, macroscopic quantities (density, momentum, velocity and 

pressure) are reconstructed through moment summations as depicted in  Figure 2. The D2Q9 lattice 

velocities are defined as c 0=(0,0) for the rest particle, {(1,0),(0,1),( 1,0),(0, 1)}, 1,2,3,4 i i − − =c for 

orthogonal directions, and {(1,1),( 1,1),( 1, 1),(1, 1)}, 5,6,7,8 i i − − − − =c for diagonal directions [45] .

This reconstruction ensures that outputs are directly interpretable within the LBM framework and 

that conservation laws ( 1 ii

f

 = −  for mass, 2 i ii

f

 = − u c for momentum) are inherently 

satisfied. The ph ysics -informed loss function combines four residual terms (ε₁, ε₂, ε₃, ε₄) representing 

mass conservation, momentum conservation, equation of state, and boundary conditions, 

respectively, along with data loss data  measuring discrepanc y against reference LBM solutions. The 

total loss total data physics BC = + + drives iterative parameter optimization until convergence. To 

enhance multi -scale feature capture for complex interfacial dynamics, an alternative U -Net based 

architecture is imple mented ( Figure 3). As shown in the figure above, the U -Net replaces the 

traditional feedforward network with an encoder -decoder network structure and utilizes convolutional 

layers. The encoder part of the network d ownsamples the spatiotemporal inputs by successive 

downsampling operations and obtains feature maps of sizes 8x64, 256x32, 128x256, and 256x128, 

which characterize the hierarchical information from the microscopic level of the interfaces to the 

macroscopic level of droplet morphologies. The bottleneck layer of size 256x512 characterizes the latent representation of the inputs after being compressed by the encoder network. The decoder 

network utilizes upsampling and skip connections to obtain the distributio n functions. The network 

architecture is named U -Net K -PINN. In addition, the AE -K-PINN and U -Net -K-PINN are also 

considered. 

Figure 3. Architecture of the U -Net based PINN framework for enhanced multi -scale feature 

extraction. 

2.6 Loss Function 

The total loss function has three major components: physics residual loss, data mismatch loss, and 

boundary condition loss. Physics residual loss measures the violation of the discrete Boltzmann -BGK 

equation at collocation points in the s patiotemporal domain. The residual loss in a particular direction, 

denoted by i, is given by: 1 ( )eq ii i i i i i

fR f f f St

= +   + − − c

(10 )

where ∂𝑓 𝑖 / ∂𝑡 and ∇𝑓 𝑖 are obtained via automatic differentiation, eq if is the equilibrium distribution 

from the Hermite expansion: 22 4 2

( )1 2 2     

> eq iiiisss

f w c c c

   = + + −  

c u c u u u 

(11 )

and iS is the Shan –Chen forcing term 2 4

( ) ( )( )11 2    

> iiiiiss

S w c c

 −    = − +     

c u F c u c F(12 )

Here F is t he pseudopotential force written as: ( ) ( ( )) ( ( )) i i ii

G w

    = − +F x x x c c

(13 )

The physics loss is defined as 8 21 0

1 coll Nphys in icoll 

RN = =

=   

(14 )

The data mismatch loss measures discrepancy between predicted and reference LBM solutions at 

sparse observation points: 2 2 21

1 ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , )              

> data NLBM LBM LBM data jjjjjjjjjjjjjdata

x y t u x y t u v x y t vN



> =

 = − + − + −  

(15 )

This ensures predictions remain anchored to empirical observations. The boundary condition loss 

enforces periodic conditions at lateral/top edges and bounce -back conditions at the solid substrate: 2 2

( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) ( , , ) periodic i left i right i top i bottom i

f x y t f x y t f x y t f x y t= − + −

(16 )2wall points   

> opposite BC ii

f f= −

(17 )

The initial condition loss ensures correct temporal evolution from t=0: 20,

( , ,0) ( , )init x y 

x y x y 

= −

(18 )

The total loss is a weighted combination: total phys phys data data BC BC init init 

= + + +

(19 )

with typ ical values λphys ~1, λdata ~10 -100, λBC ~10, and λinit ~10. The higher data loss weight prioritizes 

agreement with observations while physics and boundary losses provide regularization for physical 

consistency. 

2.7 Training Strategy The training of the Lattice -Boltzmann -driven PINN follows a two -stage procedure: a first stage of 

global optimization by means of the Adam optimizer, followed by a refinement stage by means of 

the L -BFGS quasi -Newton method. The Adam optimizer is preferred for the first stage because of its 

ro bustness in handling noisy gradients due to random mini -batch sampling. The initial learning rate 

is set to 1.0e -4, following sensitivity analysis of the hyperparameters (Section 3.1). Gradient clipping 

is employed with a clipping threshold of 1.0 to preve nt gradients from exploding during the 

backpropagation procedure. The training data consist of sparse snapshots of the Lattice -Boltzmann 

flow, sampled from 1024 to 8192 spatial locations per snapshot, in addition to collocation data 

(usually 4096) that are uniformly distributed in space -time over the domain where the physics 

residuals are computed. The inputs (x, y, t) are scaled to the range [ -1, 1] by means of the min/max 

normalization technique to ensure that the magnitudes of the gradients are well -beha ved. 

The strategy of curriculum learning is used to incrementally increase the complexity of the physical 

problem. For the initial warm -up period of 20,000 epochs, the strength of the pseudopotential model, 

Gads, is set to zero, which means that the multi phase interfacial dynamics are not considered. This 

allows the network to learn the structure of single -phase flow and the macroscopic fields. After the 

warm -up period, Gads starts to increase to its full value over 10,000 epochs, and simultaneously, the 

weight of the data loss, λ data , increases from 10 to 100. The Adam optimization phase follows for 

150,000 epochs, during which the convergence of the network is controlled by observing the 

individual losses and the total loss. The training is performed on a GPU -accelerated hardware setup 

with an NVIDIA A100 card and 40 GB of memory. The training time varies from 6 to 12 hours 

depending on the architectural complexity. After the Adam phase, the network weights are fine -tuned 

by an L -BFGS optimization algorith m for 50,000 iterations, which results in a decrease in the loss by 

one to two orders of magnitude. The resulting residuals in the physical quantities are in the range of 

10 -3 to 10 -4. To avoid overfitting and improve the ability of the network to generali ze, an early 

stopping criterion based on a validation set consisting of 10% of the LBM data is used. The training 

is stopped if the validation loss does not decrease in 10,000 consecutive epochs. The network weights 

with the minimum validation loss are use d. Additionally, dropout regularization with a dropout rate 

of 0.1 is used in the hidden layers during the Adam phase to ensure that robust features, which do not 

depend on the specific activation of the neurons, are learned. 

2.8 Evaluation Metrics 

For ass essing the prediction accuracy of the K -PINN model, a variety of quantitative performance 

metrics is employed. The L2 norm provides a global accuracy measure by summing up errors over 

the entire spatio -temporal domain. The root mean square error (RMSE) mea sures the average magnitude of errors. RMSE is found to be sensitive to outliers. The mean absolute error (MAE) treats 

all errors equally without overemphasizing larger errors. The coefficient of determination (R2) 

measures the proportion of variance in re ference solutions explained by the PINN prediction. R2 

values closer to unity indicate better agreement between reference solutions of the lattice Boltzmann 

method (LBM) and PINN prediction. Apart from these aggregate performance measures, scatter plot 

com parisons of predicted density values with true density values at different spatio -temporal locations 

are employed to visualize the correlation between predicted solutions and true solutions. The scatter 

plot can reveal whether errors are distributed unifor mly or concentrated in specific regions of the 

spatio -temporal domain, such as interfaces or contact lines. The error distribution histograms describe 

the frequency of different error magnitudes. Gaussian distributions of error magnitudes centered at 

zero indicate stochastic errors. Temporal error evolution curves describe the growth of accumulated 

errors over time. They help in assessing the long -term accuracy of the solution by monitoring possible 

growth of errors due to extrapolation in time. ( ) 

> 22all points
> pred LBM

L

 = −

(20 )( )

> 21

1 N pred LBM n nn

RMSE N

 

> =

= −

(21 )1

1 N pred LBM n nn

MAE N

 

> =

= −

(22 )( )( ) 

> 22121

1     

> Npred LBM nnnNLBM LBM nn

R

  

> ==

−= −−

# 

(23 )

where values approaching unity indicate close agreement with reference LBM solutions. 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1 Model Training and Hyperparameter Optimization 

The Lattice -Boltzmann -PINN i s compared against LBM results in simulating droplet spreading on 

substrates of varying roughness and wettability. The data set includes two -dimensional simulation 

results of a liquid droplet with initial radius R0 = 60 units placed on a rigid substrate ch aracterized 

by heterogeneity in contact angles due to substrate roughness, simulated by the Shan -Chen pseudopotential method. The performance of K -PINN architectures in terms of prediction accuracy 

and computational efficiency is highly dependent on hyperp arameters during the training process. 

These hyperparameters include collocation density points, learning rate, and choice of activation 

functions in the network architecture and optimizer configurations. A detailed analysis is conducted 

on how these hyper parameters affect convergence patterns and accuracy of the solution. All training 

trajectories are plotted on a logarithmic scale in accordance with the wide range of convergence 

during different stages of training. 

Figure 4 illustrates the spatial distri bution of the training data points obtained from LBM simulation 

results at four different densities: 1024 points, 2048 points, 4096 points, and 8192 points. The 

computational domain is defined by x ranging from 0 to 200 and y ranging from 0 to 200 in latti ce 

units. At a density of 1024 points, as shown in Figure 4a, there is a noticeable lack of density in the 

data points, characterized by gaps in the domain and a high level of clustering around the boundaries. 

As the density increases to 2048 points in Fig ure 4b and 4096 points in Figure 4c, a significant 

improvement in spatial density is observed in covering the computational domain uniformly. At a 

density of 8192 points in Figure 4d, a high level of saturation is observed in covering the 

computational dom ain uniformly, thus providing sufficient information in macroscopic field 

reconstruction by the PINN. It is observed that a high density of points is located along the bottom 

boundary of the domain due to a high level of spatial detail required in simulati ng droplet -substrate 

interactions. Figure 4. Spatial distribution of training data points for different sampling densities: (a) 1024, (b) 

2048, (c) 4096, and (d) 8192 points. 

The choice of the learning rate controls the step siz e in gradient descent, impacting 

convergence stability and accuracy. Figure 5 presents a systematic evaluation of different learning 

rates over three orders of magnitude, namely 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001, and 0.000001, using the Adam 

optimizer. It is evident that at a higher learning rate, namely LR = 0.001, Figure 5a, the data loss 

decreases sharply within the first 10,000 epochs. However, the physics loss does not achieve smooth 

convergence, showing persistent oscillations. This is a consequence of an overly large step size, 

leading to parameter overshooting in areas where the loss landscape has a higher curvature, namely 

when enforcing Lattice -Boltzmann residuals. Decreasing the learning rate to 0.0001, Figure 5b, leads 

to a marked improvement in convergence stability, where all loss components, namely physics loss 

(green), data loss (orange), boundary loss (blue), and total loss (red), decrease monotonically. The 

physics loss achieves smooth convergence to 0.01 at the end of the Adam optimization phase, wher eas 

the data and boundary loss achieve 0.01 and 0.001 , respectively. A further decrease to a learning rate 

of 0.00001, Figure 5c, leads to more stable convergence with reduced oscillations. However, a higher 

number of epochs is required to achieve a simila r level of accuracy. The lowest learning rate, namely 

0.000001, Figure 5d, leads to a computationally expensive optimization, where loss descent is gradual 

and fails to achieve a similar level of accuracy within 150,000 epochs. The L -BFGS refinement phase, 

indicated by the light blue region, confirms that a moderate value of the learning rate facilitates a smoother transition to quasi -Newton optimization and leads to successful convergence. Therefore, a 

learning rate of 0.0001 is identified as optimal, bala ncing convergence speed, stability, and accuracy, 

consistent with established practices for physics -informed neural networks addressing multiphysics 

problems. 

Figure 5. Learning rate sensitivity analysis showing training loss evo lution for learning rates: (a) 

0.001, (b) 0.0001, (c) 0.00001, and (d) 0.000001. Adam optimizer used during the green phase; L -

BFGS during the light blue phase. 

The density of collocation points determines the spatial resolution at which the physics residu als are 

satisfied in the spatiotemporal domain. Figure 6 illustrates the analysis of four different density cases: 

1024, 2048, 4096, and 8192 points, distributed uniformly in the spatiotemporal domain. The analysis 

is performed over a two -phase training re gime: first, Adam optimization (~150,000 epochs, cyan 

shaded area), then L -BFGS (~50,000 iterations, light blue shaded area). During the Adam phase, the 

four different loss functions ; physics loss, data loss, boundary loss, and total loss monotonically 

dec rease. The physics loss decreases from its initial value of approximately 100 to 0.01 . The data loss 

decreases most rapidly in the initial epochs due to the priority given to the sparse LBM snapshots. 

The physics loss decreases more slowly due to the diffi culty in enforcing the discrete Boltzmann 

equation over the entire spatiotemporal domain. Once the L -BFGS phase is activated (dashed lines), 

all four loss functions are reduced by one to two orders of magnitude. The final values of the four 

different loss functions are in the range of 0.001 to 0.0001 . Increasing the density of the collocation 

points from 1024 to 8192 reveals more consistent convergence profiles for all cases. Moreover, the fluctuations in the physics loss are less significant, which can be explained by the enhanced stability 

of the automatic differentiation. However, only small improvements are observed for the density of 

4096 points. This suggests that this density is optimal for balancing the computational cost of the 

multiphase flow simul ation and the accuracy of enforcing the physics residual. 

Figure 6. Training loss evolution for different collocation point densities: (a) 1024, (b) 2048, (c) 

4096, and (d) 8192 points. Figure 7. Effect of activation functions on training convergence: (a) GELU, (b) ELU, (c) ReLU, and 

(d) Tanh. 

The a ctivation functions have a significant influence on the K -PINN’s ability to learn the sharp 

interfacial gradients of multiphase droplet dynamics. A comparison of the performance of GELU, 

ELU, ReLU, and Tanh activation functions is shown in Figure 7 for a network of identical capacity 

and training procedure. The network architecture consisted of eight hidden layers of 100 neurons each 

and an Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 1e -4. The collocation points were fixed at 4096 

points per network, ensuring a good representation of the interfacial points. The activation function 

is required to produce accurate gradients via automatic differentiation over the high number of 

network layers due to the presence of high -order derivatives of the distribution fields in the Lattice -

Boltzmann -based physics residual. The activation function of choice for the problem is Tanh (Figure 

7d), which provides a consistent optim ization trajectory. The loss decreases smoothly over the 

training process from the initial range of ~1e2 -1e1 to the final range of ~1e -3-1e -5. The optimization 

process does not have significant oscillations during the Adam optimization phase. This is expec ted 

due to the smooth differentiability and bounding of the output of the activation function. The output 

of the activation function does not become unstable even for sharp changes in density and velocity 

fields over training epochs such as 0, 5e4, 1e5, 1. 5e5, and 2e5. In contrast, GELU (Figure 7a), while reaching the similar terminal behavior, exhibits greater 

variability in the early stages, with the physics loss showing greater variation as it moves away from 

1e0 towards 1e -2 and lower. This indicates th e nonlinearity introduces greater curvature/gradient 

sensitivity in the early stages of the Adam optimizer (approximately 2e4 to 6e4 epochs). ELU (Figure 

7b) sits between GELU and Tanh. It exhibits the rapid descent in the data term loss in the early stage s, 

moving from 1e1 towards 1e -2. Yet, the physics loss converges at a slower rate, resulting in the longer 

plateau in the 1e -2 to 1e -3 range before the final stage. ReLU (Figure 7c), while being stable within 

the piecewise linear structure, exhibits greate r difficulty with the physics loss floor, remaining in the 

1e -3 to 1e -4 range for longer. This is because the kink in the function at the origin complicates the 

representation of smooth interfacial behavior with consistent curvature. As such, the optimizer may 

take longer to smooth the solution (e.g., after 1e5 epochs), even if the L -BFGS optimization phase 

closes the gap. 

What can be learned from Figure 7 is not only the observation that “Tanh performs best,” but also the 

reason behind the improved robust ness in the multiphase PINN optimization. Indeed, the L -BFGS 

optimization phase closes the gap for all activations, as can be seen in the convergence to similar loss 

levels in the final stages. Yet, the grouped behavior indicates the systematic effect of s moothness on 

the early convergence to the low loss regime. As such, the smoothness is also reflected in the 

smoothness of the physics enforcement with less trial and error during the initial 1e5 to 2e5 epochs. 

Numerically, the behavior indicates the diffic ulty during the training process is scale -dependent. 

Indeed, the loss reduction occurs in the 10 to 10 0 range in the early stages, followed by finer 

corrections in the 0.1 , 0.01 , and finally the 0.001 to 0.00001 range. 

In terms of the design parameters fo r the K -PINNs in the context of Lattice -Boltzmann -driven 

multiphase wettability, the above results imply the usage of differentiably smooth activation functions 

(e.g., Tanh), moderate learning rates (1e -4), balanced collocation density (4096), and sufficie nt 

interfacial density to allow the simultaneous minimization of data and physics terms. As for the actual 

training parameters, it is implied that greater computational cost (e.g., longer Adam schedules up to 

~1.5e5 –2e5 epochs) can be traded off for stabil ity; however, if the activation function is non -smooth 

(e.g., ReLU), convergence to the same physics quality plateau may require greater optimization 

pressure, even with L -BFGS optimization available to refine the solution. 

3.2 Temporal Evolution of Drople t Spreading: Comparison of PINN Architectures on Rough 

Unstructured and Textured Surfaces The comparative performance of three different neural network architectures for predicting the 

temporal dynamics of droplet spreading is shown for the baseline deep n eural network K -PINN 

(DNN -K-PINN), the autoencoder -enhanced K -PINN (AE -K-PINN), and the uncertainty -aware K -

PINN (UA -K-PINN), as depicted in Figures 8 and 9. Each of these models is trained on sparse lattice 

Boltzmann method (LBM) data and is evaluated at four different time points (T = 1000Δt, 3000Δt, 

5000Δt, and 7000Δt), which correspond to different stages of droplet spreading. Figure 8 is a rigorous 

temporal comparison of the droplet spreading dynamics predicted by the DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-

PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN models and the high -fidelity LBM solutions for different time points (T = 

1000, 3000, 5000, and 7000 lattice time units). At the early stage of droplet spreading (T = 1000), the 

reference LBM solution is characterized by a droplet shape with a maximu m height H_LBM ≈ 112 -

114 lattice units (lu), a base diameter D_LBM ≈ 78 -82 lu, a curvature radius R ≈ 56 -58 lu, a liquid 

density ρ_l ≈ 6.8 -7.0, an interfacial density ρ_i ≈ 3.1 -3.6, and a gas density ρ_g ≈ 0.35 -0.42. The 

droplet shape predicted by the DNN -K-PINN is characterized by a lower droplet height (H ≈ 106 -

109 lu), a larger base diameter (D ≈ 84 -88 lu), and a diffused interface of 4 -5 units. The absolute 

errors are localized and are of the order |ε| ≈ 1.8 -2.6. The droplet shape predicted by the AE -K-PINN 

is closer to the reference solution and is characterized by a droplet height (H ≈ 109 -111 lu), a base 

diameter (D ≈ 81 -85 lu), and a smaller density deviation Δρ ≈ ±0.08 -0.12. 

For intermediate times, at T = 3000 and T = 5000, viscous dissipation and surface roughness are 

responsible for continued spreading and flattening of the drop. The LBM results in a decrease in drop 

height from H_3000 ≈ 101 –104 lu to H_5000 ≈ 95 –98 lu, while the base diameter increases from 

D_3000 ≈ 104 –108 lu to D_5000 ≈ 122 –128 lu. The contact line moves by 20 –24 lu, and the apparent 

contact angle decreases from 102 –105° to 88 –92°. The DNN -K-PINN model demonstrates a trend of 

increasing errors, with H_3000 ≈ 94 –98 lu, H_5000 ≈ 88 –92 lu, and D_5000 ≈ 130 –136 lu, with peak 

errors of 2.8 –3.5 and density fluctuations of ±0.18 –0.25. The AE -K-PINN model retains its high 

accuracy, with H_5000 ≈ 92 –96 lu, D_5000 ≈ 124 –129 lu, interface errors of 1.2 –2.0, and volume 

conservation errors less than 2.5%. U -Net -K-PINN again closely follows th e dynamics predicted by 

the LBM, with H_3000 ≈ 100 –103 lu, H_5000 ≈ 95 –97 lu, and D_5000 ≈ 123 –127 lu, with errors in 

contact line position less than 1.0 lu, density deviations within ±0.03 –0.05, and L2 error norms as 

small as 0.018 –0.025. At late time T = 7000, the drop reaches a quasi -equilibrium configuration. The 

LBM solution converges to a constant drop height H_eq ≈ 92 –95 lu, base diameter D_eq ≈ 132 –136 

lu, equilibrium contact angle 86 –90°, apex curvature radius R ≈ 67 –69 lu, and a However, the DNN -

K-PINN does not converge completely and predicts H ≈ 86 –90 lu, D ≈ 138 –145 lu, and residual 

interfacial undulations with amplitude 2 –3 lu, with the maximum absolute errors being 2.2 AE -K-

PINN has better equilibrium capture characteristics: H ≈ 90 -93 lu, D ≈ 134 -138 lu, and error magnitudes are reduced to 1.0 -1.8. U -Net -K-PINN has near -perfect agreement with the LBM 

benchmark, where H ≈ 92 -94 lu, D ≈ 133 -135 lu, volume conservation error <0.8%, and maximum 

pointwise error <0.9, even in the presence of roughne ss -induced CL pinning. 

Overall across the complete temporal range, U -Net -K-PINN results in a consistent 55 -70% decrease 

in RMSE and 60 -80% decrease in peak error compared to DNN -K-PINN. U -Net -K-PINN is shown 

to achieve the highest accuracy in predictions a cross all time regimes by reproducing droplet height, 

base diameter, contact line movement, and density profiles with sub -lattice unit accuracy. A 

significant improvement is achieved by AE -K-PINN compared to conventional DNN -K-PINN in 

terms of reducing bul k density errors and improving long -time regime stability; however, a lack of 

improvement in resolving sharp interface features is noted. DNN -K-PINN is shown to incur 

significant long -time errors, particularly around the contact line and equilibrium state, making it 

unsuitable for modeling complex wetting phenomena. The results highlight the importance of 

encoder -decoder architectures with skip connections in learning complex physics of multiphase 

flows. Figure 8. Temporal evolut ion of droplet spreading on a rough surface with stochastic asperities. 

Figure 9 shows the detailed spatiotemporal comparison of the droplet spreading on the periodically 

textured substrate as predicted by the DNN -K-PINN, the AE -K-PINN, and the U -Net -K-PIN N

approaches, compared to the reference LBM data at different time steps, T = 1000, 3000, 5000, and 

7000. At the early time T = 1000, the LBM simulation shows the droplet is partially supported by the 

pillar tops, which is indicative of the metastable Cass ie state. Quantitatively, the LBM data show the 

droplet height H LBM ≈ 114 to 117 lu, the base diameter DLBM ≈ 74 to 78 lu, the contact angle 112 to 

118 degrees, the apex curvature radius R ≈ 58 to 61 lu, and the density of the liquid phase ρl ≈ 6.85 to 7.05. Moreover, the interface thickness remains within 2 to 3 lu, while the density gradients above 

the pillar edges reach up to ρ ≈ 4.2 to 4.8. While the DNN -K-PINN model is qualitatively similar to 

the LBM data, the model underestimates the apex height H ≈ 107 to 111 lu, overestimates the base 

diameter D ≈ 80 to 85 lu, and increases the interface thickness to 4 to 6 lu. As a result, the pointwise 

errors ≈ 1.6 to 2.4 are concentrated at the pillar tips and contact lines. The AE -K-PINN model 

improves the early -time droplet shape by yielding H ≈ 110 to 113 lu, D ≈ 76 to 80 lu, and density 

deviation | Δρ| ≈ 0.10 to 0.15. 

At these intermediate times of T = 3000 and 5000, the process of droplet spreading is significantly 

affected by the presence of pillar -induced capillary barriers, which lead to intermittent effects of 

depinning an d asymmetry in the interface deformation. The LBM solution indicates a continuous 

decrease in the height from H 3000 ≈ 103 -106 lu to H 5000 ≈ 97 -100 lu, whereas the base diameter 

increases from D 3000 ≈ 96 -100 lu to D 5000 ≈ 116 -122 lu. The apparent contact an gle also decreases 

from 102 -106 degrees to 90 -94 degrees. The contact line also advances in discrete jumps of 3 -6 lu 

while passing over successive pillars. The performance of the DNN -K-PINN is poor in this case, 

predicting a value of H 5000 ≈ 88 -93 lu, D 500 0 ≈ 125 -132 lu, contact line overshoot of 4 -7 lu, and density 

oscillations of up to ±0.22 -0.30. The maximum errors are also high, ranging from 2.6 -3.2. The AE -

K-PINN performs better by reducing these discrepancies and predicting a value of H 5000 ≈ 93 -97 lu ,

D5000 ≈ 118 -123 lu, and an interface thickness of 3 -4 lu. The maximum errors are also low, ranging 

from 1.4 -2.1. However, it also fails to capture the sharp effects of pinning by smoothing them out. 

The U -Net -K-PINN performs very well throughout the simu lation process by predicting a value of 

H3000 ≈ 102 -105 lu and H 5000 ≈ 97 -99 lu. The base diameter is predicted to be D 5000 ≈ 117 -121 lu. 

In the late time T = 7000, the droplet morphology approaches the state of quasi -equilibrium, where 

the droplet height, diameter, contact angle, apex radius, and volume are determined by the interplay 

between surface tension and the effects of the solid fraction. The numerical solution provided by the 

LBM is found to converge to the equilibrium state with the droplet heigh t H eq = 94 -97 lu, diameter 

Deq = 126 -130 lu, contact angle = 88 -92 degrees, apex radius R = 68 -71 lu, while the droplet volume 

is conserved with an accuracy within ±0.5%. The DNN -K-PINN fails to converge to the desired state 

with the predicted droplet heig ht, diameter, and interface morphology, while the predicted maximum 

pointwise error is 2.0 -2.7. The AE -K-PINN is found to converge moderately with the predicted 

droplet height, diameter, and interface morphology, while the predicted maximum pointwise error is 

1.1 -1.8. In contrast, the U -Net -K-PINN is found to converge well with the predicted droplet height, 

diameter, and interface morphology, while the predicted maximum pointwise error is less than 0.8. 

The above results on the droplet morphology on the tex tured surface confirm that the U -Net -K-PINN 

is capable of achieving an accuracy between 60 -80% compared to the DNN -K-PINN and AE -K-PINN, while the accuracy is between 35 -55% compared to the AE -K-PINN, indicating that the 

spatially aware encoder -decoder arc hitectures with skip connections are vital for the accurate 

prediction of the droplet dynamics on geometrically complex, pinning -dominated surfaces. 

Figure 9. Temporal evolution of droplet spreading on a textured surface with per iodic pillars. 

3.3 Interface Profile Tracking Across Multiple Time Scales Figure 10 . Interface profile evolution for droplet spreading on a rough surface. 

Figure 10 offers a detailed comparison of reference simulations using the Lattice Boltzmann Method 

(LBM) with predictions made using the K -U-Net -PINN architecture in tracking the interface profiles 

of a droplet over long periods of time. The interface profiles in (a) through (i) represent nine 

representative snapshots of a dropl et, starting from early -time stages of spreading at T = 1000 ΔT 

through late -time stages of quasi -equilibrium at T = 50,000 ΔT. The interface of a droplet in these 

images is represented as an iso -density contour, which is then projected in the Cartesian X -Y plane 

in lattice units (lu) to allow for a clear geometric analysis of its curvature, base width, and apex height. 

At early times, when T = 1000 ΔT, the droplet has a moderately flattened interface with a base 

diameter of approximately 92 lu and an apex height of approximately 78 lu. The predicted interface 

using K -U-Net -PINN compares with the reference interface predicted using LBM with a deviation of 

less than 0.8 lu over most of its length, with localized deviations near the three -phase contact line 

li mited to 1.2 lu in magnitude. At a later time, when T = 7000 ΔT, increased spreading in the lateral 

direction causes the diameter of the base to increase to approximately 104 lu, while the apex height 

decreases to approximately 72 lu. At this stage, there is a clear indication of a high level of accuracy 

in the predicted interface using K -U-Net -PINN, which nearly overlaps with the reference interface 

predicted using LBM, with a normal deviation of less than 0.6 lu, a maximum deviation of 1.0 lu, and a curva ture error of less than 2.5% on average. This demonstrates a high level of accuracy in K -U-

Net -PINN in reproducing early -time dynamics, which are dominated by capillary effects involving 

surface tension and viscous dissipation forces. 

With time progressing to the intermediate stages T = 13 0 00 ΔT, T = 19 000 ΔT, and T = 25 000 ΔT, 

the droplet gradually reshapes to a near -spherical cap. For T = 13 000 ΔT, the base diameter increases 

to about 112 lu, and the apex height remains steady at about 70 lu. The predicted interface has an 

average radia l error of only 0.4 lu, which means the relative geometric error is less than 0.6% when 

normalized by the radius of curvature, which is about 68 lu. For T = 19 000 ΔT, the base diameter 

increases to about 120 lu, and the apex height slightly increases to a bout 74 lu because of the 

redistribution of internal pressure. The predicted interface has a maximum deviation of 0.9 lu near 

the contact area compared to the LBM reference, and the deviation is less than 0.3 lu in the central 

area. For T = 25 000 ΔT, the droplet reaches a quasi -steady -state regime with a base diameter of about 

126 lu, an apex height of about 76 lu, and an apparent contact angle of about 68°. The predicted 

interface by the K -U-Net -PINN highly resembles the droplet geometry. The average inte rface error 

remains below 0.35 lu, and the apex height error remains below 0.5 lu. The predicted base diameter 

remains within an error of less than 1.1 lu, which means the relative error remains about 0.9% 

compared to the LBM results. 

At later times, T = 3 2 000 ΔT, T = 38 000 ΔT, T = 44 000 ΔT, and T = 50 000 ΔT, a nearly static 

equilibrium configuration is achieved, where the interface geometry varies least with time. For time 

T = 32 000 ΔT, the base diameter converges to a value close to 132 lu, and the a pex height converges 

to a value close to 80 lu. The prediction of K -U-Net -PINN has an average deviation of 0.25 lu, with 

a maximum deviation of 0.7 lu at the extreme left and right contact points. For time T = 38 000 ΔT, 

the predicted interface and referen ce interface appear to be virtually identical to each other, at least 

to a visual inspection, with an estimated Hausdorff distance below 0.5 lu, and an RMS interface error 

of 0.22 lu. For time T = 44 000 ΔT, the droplet geometry has not changed within ±0.3 lu, and the 

predicted apex height is 82 lu, differing from the LBM value by less than 0.4 lu. For time T = 50 000 

ΔT, a state of equilibrium is achieved, where the base diameter is approximately 138 lu, the apex 

height is approximately 84 lu, and the cont act angle is close to 72 degrees. The K -U-Net -PINN 

successfully captures this final state with exceptional accuracy, where the error in the height of the 

apex is less than 0.3 lu, the error in the base diameter is less than 0.8 lu, and the maximum normal 

deviation does not exceed 0.6 lu. Furthermore, the cumulative average of the interface tracking error 

for all nine instances remains less than 0.45 lu. Moreover, the relative geometric error does not exceed 

1.1% over the course of nearly 50,000 units of ΔT. All of these results prove the K -U-Net -PINN’s 

potential in accurately predicting the shape of the droplet over large time intervals with near -LBM accuracy. From the early spreading stage, where the base diameter is in the range of 92 -104 lu, the 

apex heig ht is in the range of 72 -78 lu. Then, from the intermediate relaxation stage, where the base 

diameter is in the range of 112 -126 lu, the apex height is in the range of 70 -76 lu. Finally, from the 

late equilibrium stage, where the base diameter is close to 138 lu, the apex height is close to 84 lu. In 

all of these cases, the interfaces predicted by the K -U-Net -PINN remain within sub -lattice unit 

accuracy. The accuracy of the K -U-Net -PINN in preserving the curvature, the location of the contact 

line, and the overall geometry of the droplet, with errors less than 0.5 lu, further emphasizes the power 

of combining kinetic constraints with the U -Net multiscale architecture. All of these results confirm 

that K -U-Net -PINN has the potential in not only predicting den sity fields but also accurately 

localizing interfaces, thus making it a powerful surrogate for high -fidelity multiphase flow 

simulations. 

Figure 11 illustrates the evolution of the interface profiles for droplet spreading on smooth substrates 

with periodic textures over nine different time steps (T = 200 Δt to 10 000 Δt). The time scales for 

this case are smaller compared to those for the rough substrates due to the relatively faster spreading 

dynamics on smoother substrates with less contact -line pinning. At T = 200 Δt (Figure 11a), droplets 

are in the initial stages of spreading and have relatively high hemispherical profiles. The predictions 

of U -Net -K-PINN are very close to those of the LBM method. With increasing time up to T = 1 400 

Δt, 2 600 Δt, and 3 800 Δt (Figures 11b -d), droplet spreading is very fast, and the droplet heights 

decrease from y ≈ 110 to y ≈ 100 while the base diameter increases accordingly. U -Net -K-PINN 

predictions of droplet spreading are very accurate and have good overlap with the LBM method. At 

intermediate times (T = 5 000 Δt and 6 400 Δt (Figures 11e -f), the rate of droplet spreading slows 

down as droplets approach equilibrium configurations. The droplet interfaces become flatter and 

flatter until the contact angles are close to those for the prescribed wettability conditions. U -Net -K-

PINN predictions of droplet spreading are very accurate and have good overlap with the LBM 

method. At these time steps, there are no noticeable discrepancies between the predicted and reference 

curve s. At the last time steps (T = 7 600 Δt, 8 800 Δt, and 10 000 Δt (Figures 11g -i), droplet spreading 

is very slow and the droplets are close to equilibrium configurations. The droplet interfaces are nearly 

identical for U -Net -K-PINN and LBM simulations. The droplet spreading is symmetrical on the 

smooth substrates due to periodic textures compared to the random nature of the rough substrates. Figure 11 . Interface profile evolution for droplet spreading on a textured substrate with periodic 

textures. 

Comparing results between rough and textured substrates reveals several key observations. First, 

spreading dynamics on rough surfaces occur over longer time scales (50000Δt versus 10000Δt), 

reflecting enhanced contact line pinning induced by stochastic asp erities. Random roughness 

elements create energy barriers resisting contact line motion, thereby slowing spreading and 

increasing equilibration time. Second, interface profiles on rough surfaces exhibit greater variability 

and asymmetry, particularly in co ntact line regions, whereas textured surfaces promote more uniform 

and symmetric spreading due to periodic surface features. Third, U-Net -K-PINN achieves 

comparable accuracy on both substrates, maintaining close agreement with LBM reference solutions 

throu ghout entire spreading processes. Maximum deviations between predicted and reference 

interface positions remain within few lattice units across all time steps, corresponding to relative 

errors below 2% based on droplet radii. Quantitative agreement between U-Net -K-PINN predictions 

and LBM solutions for interface profiles provides strong validation of K-PINN frameworks for 

multiphase wetting problems. The ability to accurately predict droplet shapes, contact angles, and 

spreading dynamics over extended time scales demonstrates successful learning of underlying 

physics encoded in discrete Boltzmann equations. Incorporation of U -Net architecture with skip connections enables effective feature extraction across multiple spatial scales, facilitating accurate 

reso lution of both macroscopic droplet shapes and microscopic contact line dynamics. These results 

underscore the potential of physics -informed neural networks as efficient and accurate surrogates for 

expensive lattice Boltzmann simulations in applications req uiring rapid prediction of wettability 

phenomena on complex surfaces. 

3.4 Influence of Interaction Strength on Wettability and PINN Performance 

Figure 12 illustrates the impact of different levels of solid -fluid interaction strength, G ads , on droplet 

sprea ding on a rough substrate, showing systematic changes in droplet shape, contact -line behavior, 

and wetting regime. At weak interaction levels, G ads = -1.25 to -1.45, the droplet is in a partial -wetting 

state, resembling a Cassie state. At this regime, the droplet has a large apparent contact angle, θ, of 

112 -118°. The droplet maintains a spherical cap shape with a small height of H = 114 -116 lu. The 

base of the droplet has a small diameter of D = 72 -76 lu. The droplet has a small apex radius of R = 

54 -58 lu . The liquid penetration into the valleys of the substrate is negligible, ranging from 2 to 4 lu. 

The droplet has a weakly pinned contact line, showing small lateral motion of less than 2 lu. The 

density of the liquid is constant at ρ l = 6.9 -7.0. Thus, dro plet deformation is mainly due to capillary 

forces rather than adhesion forces. At intermediate levels of G ads , ranging from -1.65 to -2.25, the 

droplet has a larger apparent contact angle, θ, of 108° to 92°. At the same time, there is a significant 

reduct ion in droplet height from 110 lu to 99 lu. The base of the droplet expands from 86 lu to 118 

lu. At the same time, the radius of the droplet apex increases from 60 lu to 67 lu. At this regime, the 

liquid has a significant penetration into the valleys of t he substrate, reaching depths of 6 -11 lu. The 

droplet has a significant lateral motion of 3 -5 lu due to the influence of the substrate. At the same 

time, there is a small deviation in the droplet volume of less than 1%, showing a consistent droplet 

wetting regime. 

At higher interaction strengths, where G ads ranges from -2.45 to -2.75, a Wenzel -dominant regime is 

observed, characterized by extensive spreading and infiltration of the roughness. The contact angle 

decreases significantly to an apparent value of 70 -82 degrees, accompanied by a decrease in height 

to H = 86 -94 lu. The base diameter is maximized, reaching a value of 126 -144 lu, more than double 

that of the weakly wetting droplet. The apex radius also increases to a value of 69 -79 lu, illustrating 

a highly flattened droplet shape. Liquid infiltration is also maximized, with infiltration depths 

reaching saturation at 12 -16 lu, and a highly corrugated contact line, where surface asperities 

contribute to contact line roughness. In conclusion, a range of Gads from -1.25 to -2.75 has shown a decrease in droplet height of 30 lu, an 

increase in base diameter of more than 70 lu, and a decrease in contact angle by 45 degrees, illustrating 

a transition from Cassie to Wenzel wetting states. This has shown that t he model is successful in 

simulating the main physical processes affecting wetting on a rough surface, namely adhesion, 

roughness, and capillary interactions, while maintaining quantitative consistency in droplet shape, 

spreading rate, and liquid mass cons ervation. 

Figure 12 . Effect of interaction strength G ads on droplet morphology on a rough substrate. Figure 13 . Effect of interaction strength G ads on droplet morphology on a textured substrate with 

per iodic pillars. 

Figure 13 displays the generalization capabilities of the learned physics -informed models on moving 

from smooth and textured geometries to periodic ones, where droplet spreading is driven by a 

combination of capillary, adhesive, and geometr ic effects. During the first stage of droplet spreading, 

the droplet maintains a compact shape characterized by a maximum height of 112 -115 lu and a base 

diameter of 74 -80 lu. Thus, the influence of surface forces on droplet spreading is dominant. 

Moreover , the density profile displays a sharp droplet -air interface of 2 -3 lu in thickness. The density 

of the liquid is kept constant at ρ l ≈ 6.9 -7.0, while the density of the gas phase is kept constant at ρ g

≈ 0.35 -0.40. Most importantly, the droplet -liquid con tact is mainly restricted to the tops of the pillars, 

where the penetration depth of the liquid into the pillar is limited to 3 -5 lu. This is a clear indication 

of a metastable Cassie state. Small -scale undulations of the droplet base, characterized by amp litudes 

of 1 -2 lu and lateral spacing of 8 -12 lu, can also be observed. During different predictions, the changes 

in droplet height are restricted to 2 -3 lu, while base diameter changes are restricted to 3 -5 lu. As the spreading continues, the droplet inte rface -surface texture interactions become more 

significant, leading to droplet flattening and lateral expansion. At this stage, the droplet height 

decreases from 108 to 110 lu to 96 to 100 lu, while the base diameter of the droplet increases from 

90 to 96 lu to 114 to 120 lu. Consequently, the apparent contact angle decreases to 92 to 98°, reflecting 

the improvement in droplet wettability due to repeated pinning -depinning of the droplet on the pillar 

array. The radius of the droplet apex also increases from 58 to 62 lu to 66 to 70 lu, confirming droplet 

flattening. Liquid penetration into the surface texture grooves also becomes more si gnificant, 

reaching 7 to 11 lu. Moreover, the density enhancement in the vicinity of the pillar edges increases to 

ρ ≈ 4.6 to 5.4. The contact line moves in discrete steps of 3 to 6 lu, consistent with the pillar pitch. 

Thus, the models correctly capture t he periodicity of the geometry in the predicted droplet spreading. 

The droplet interface distortions remain localized near the surface, with a maximum deviation of 1.5 

to 2.5 lu. The mass conservation errors remain less than 1% during the entire droplet sp reading 

process. 

In the asymptotic state, the droplet is in a kind of equilibrium due to the interplay of surface tension 

and adhesion forces between the solid and fluid, mediated by the texture geometry. In this state, the 

droplet height is stabilized to a value of 92 -96 lu units, and the base diameter is stabilized to a value 

of 126 -134 lu units. The overall spreading of the droplet is around 50 -55 lu units compared to the 

initial spreading. The contact angle is stabilized to a value of 86 -90 degrees. The apex curvature 

radius is stabilized to a value of 70 -74 units. The penetration of the liquid into the textured substrate 

is also stabilized to a value of 12 -15 units. The contact line also exhibits a stable but limited level of 

corrugations of 2 -3 units. The density of the bulk is also very consistent and is limited to a deviation 

of ±0.03 -0.06 units. The overall volume error is also limited to less than 0.8%, thereby proving 

numerical and physical consistency. In conclusion, the predictions have shown tha t the models have 

generalized very well to the textured case and have been able to predict the wetting metrics very well. 

The droplet height is reduced by 18 -22 units, and the base diameter is expanded by 46 -54 units. The 

overall roughness penetration is l imited to 9 -12 units. 

3.5 Comprehensive Model Performance Analysis and Error Estimation 

In order to perform a comprehensive quantitative evaluation of the predictive capabilities of different 

K-PINN models, this section utilizes several statistical measure s in combination with different 

visualization techniques that collectively assess the accuracy, reliability, and error of the models. The 

performance of three different Lattice -Boltzmann PINN models, namely DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-

PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN, on both rough and textured surfaces has been compared in order to 

systematically identify the most effective K -PINN architecture for simulating multiphase wettability. Figure 14 illustrates a detailed quantitative comparison of the accuracy of the three different PINN 

models, namely DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN, on both rough and textured 

surfaces in terms of four different error norms calculated over the entire spatiotemporal domain. The 

L2 error norm in Figure 14a quantifies the total error between the predicted density fields and the 

reference density fields. On rough surfaces, the DNN -K-PINN model has the highest L2 error of 

0.040, which decreases to 0.030 for the AE -K-PINN model. The U -Net -K-PINN model further 

decreases the L2 error to 0.021. The L2 errors of the DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PINN, and U -Net -K-

PINN models on textured surfaces are 0.097, 0.044, and 0.026, respectively. The U -Net -K-PINN 

model has a nearly 73% reduction in L2 error compared to the DNN -K-PINN model on textured 

surfaces. The consistent difference of 0.015 to 0.020 in L2 errors on rough surfaces compared to 

textured surfaces for all models quantifies the increased level of difficulty in approximating the 

solution due to periodic geometric features, sharp corners, and interfacial pinning effects on textured 

surfaces. 

The RMSE presented in Figure 14b offers further insights into error magnitude and variance 

sensitivity. On rough surfaces, there are clear trends in which the RMSEs decrease monotonically 

from 0.089 (DNN -K-PINN) to 0.079 (AE -K-PINN) and finally to 0.051 (U -Net -K-PINN). This 

represents a decrease of approximately 11% from DNN to AE and nearly 43% from DNN to U -Net. 

On textured surfaces, these errors are significantly higher, with 0.320, 0.144, and 0.086, respectively, 

for DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN. The error for DNN -K-PINN on textured 

surfaces is over 3.6 times larger than on rough surfaces (0.320 vs. 0.089), while U -Net -K-PINN has 

a much lower amplification factor of 1.7 (0.086 vs. 0.051). This difference quantitat ively 

demonstrates the robustness of encoder -decoder architectures with skip connections in handling 

spatially heterogeneous and high -gradient fields, which are typically associated with surface textures. 

In absolute terms, U -Net -K-PINN improves on texture d surface RMSEs by a significant 0.234 over 

DNN -K-PINN, which further emphasizes its superior capability in capturing localized interfacial 

curvature and density discontinuities. The mean absolute errors (MAE) presented in Figure 14c 

further reinforce thes e trends, which are focused on average pointwise errors. On rough surfaces, 

these are 0.038, 0.033, and 0.019, respectively, for DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN. 

This represents a decrease of 13% from DNN to AE and nearly 50% from DNN to U -Net. On textured 

surfaces, these errors increase to 0.134, decrease to 0.047, and further reduce to 0.038, respectively, 

for DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PIN It is noteworthy, however, that while the AE -K-PINN demonstrates a 

65% reduction in MAE over the DNN -K-PINN on texture d surfaces, the U-Net -K-PINN 

demonstrates a larger reduction in MAE, at 72%. The small difference in U -Net MAE on rough 

(0.019) and textured surfaces (0.038), with a difference of merely 0.019, underlines the strong generalization capability of this U -Net -based method, despite its exposure to complex periodic 

surface geometries. By contrast, the DNN -K-PINN demonstrates a 0.096 increase in MAE from 

rough to textured surfaces, indicating high sensitivity to surface complexities. 

The RMSE reported in Figure 14 b provides additional insight into error magnitude and variance 

sensitivity. For rough surfaces, RMSE values decrease systematically from 0.089 (DNN -K-PINN) to 

0.079 (AE -K-PINN) and finally to 0.051 (U -Net -K-PINN). This represents a reduction of 

approximat ely 11% between DNN and AE and nearly 43% between DNN and U -Net. On textured 

surfaces, RMSE values are markedly higher, reaching 0.320 for DNN -K-PINN, 0.144 for AE -K-

PINN, and 0.086 for U -Net -K-PINN. The DNN -K-PINN RMSE on textured surfaces is more than 

3. 6 times its rough -surface counterpart (0.320 vs. 0.089), whereas the U -Net -K-PINN shows a much 

smaller amplification factor of approximately 1.7(0.086vs . 0.051). This contrast quantitatively 

demonstrates that encoder -decoder architectures with skip connect ions are significantly more robust 

to spatial heterogeneity and sharp gradients induced by surface textures. In absolute terms, the U -

Net -K-PINN reduces textured -surface RMSE by approximately 0.234 compared to DNN -K-PINN, 

underscoring its superior ability to capture localized interfacial curvature and density discontinuities. 

The MAE plotted in Figure 14c further corroborates these trends by emphasizing average pointwise 

deviations. On rough surfaces, MAE values are 0.038 for DNN -K-PINN, 0.033 for AE -KPINN, and 

0.019 for U -Net -K-PINN. These values correspond to relative reductions of 13% from DNN to AE 

and nearly 50% from DNN to U -Net. On textured surfaces, MAE increases to 0.134 for DNN -K-

PINN, decreases to 0.047 for AE -K-PINN, and further reduces to 0.038 for U -Net -K-PINN. Notably, 

the AE -K-PINN achieves a 65% reduction in MAE relative to the DNN -K-PINN on textured surfaces, 

while the U -Net -K-PINN achieves an even greater reduction of approximately 72% . The relatively 

small difference between U -Net MAE valu es on rough (0.019) and textured (0.038) surfaces, an 

absolute increase of only 0.019 highlights the strong generalization capability of the U -Net -based 

architecture, even when confronted with complex periodic geometries. In contrast, the DNN -K-PINN 

exhibi ts a MAE increase of 0.096 between rough and textured surfaces, reflecting pronounced 

sensitivity to geometric complexity. Figure 14 . Comparative performance metrics for three PINN architectures on rough (blue) and 

textured (oran ge) surfaces: (a) L₂ norm, (b) RMSE, (c) MAE, and (d) R² coefficient. 

The coefficient of determination, R 2, shown in Figure 14d, is another supplementary metric of 

predictive accuracy. The R 2 metric is a measure of the proportion of the variance for the pr edicted 

solution that is explained by the actual solution. The R 2 metric for the rough surfaces is found to be 

0.930 for the DNN -K-PINN, 0.979 for the AE -K-PINN, and 0.999 for the U -Net -K-PINN. This 

indicates that the baseline DNN is able to capture only 9 3% of the actual solution's variance, whereas 

the AE -K-PINN is able to improve this to nearly 98%, and the U -Net -K-PINN is able to capture over 

99.9% of the actual solution's variance. The R 2 metric for the textured surfaces is found to have a 

small decrea se in the U -Net -K-PINN and AE -K-PINN to 0.972 and 0.937 for the AE -K-PINN and 

DNN -K-PINN, respectively, whereas the U -Net -K-PINN is able to maintain an exceptionally high 

value of 0.999. The small decrease of only 0.000 -0.001 in the R 2 metric for the U -Net -K-PINN from 

the rough to the textured surfaces is particularly noteworthy and indicates near -perfect agreement 

with reference LBM solutions despite significant interfacial distortion and periodic pinning. The 

DNN -K-PINN also shows a noticeable loss in var iance of about 0.007 from the rough to the textured 

surfaces, consistent with its high L 2, RMSE, and MAE errors. The U -Net -K-PINN is seen to have the 

lowest errors of L 2 = 0.021 -0.026, RMSE = 0.051 -0.086, and MAE = 0.019 -0.038, and an R 2 value 

of nearly 0. 999. The AE -K-PINN is seen to have an improvement of 25 -65% over the baseline errors, whereas the DNN -K-PINN is seen to have a high level of sensitivity to geometric complexity, with 

errors increasing by a factor of 2 -4 for textured surfaces compared to ro ugh surfaces. 

Figure 15 . Scatter plots of predicted vs true density values for textured surfaces (top row) and rough 

surfaces (bottom row): (a,d) DNN -K-PINN, (b,e) AE -K-PINN, and (c,f) U -Net -K-PINN. 

Figure 15 demonstrates a coll ection of scatter plots comparing predicted density and actual density 

for both architectures, with separate plots for textured surfaces (top row, Figures 15a -c) and rough 

surfaces (bottom row, Figures 15d -f). Each point in these plots represents a spatiot emporal location 

in computational domains, with the x -axis indicating reference density using the LBM method and 

the y -axis indicating predicted density using PINN networks. The dashed diagonal line represents 

perfect prediction. For the DNN -K-PINN archite cture, Figures 15a and 15d show significant diagonal 

scatter, especially for intermediate density levels (ρ ≈ 2 -5) associated with interfacial regions. The 

points show a systematic deviation, with some predictions overestimating and some underestimating 

true density levels, which causes a broadening of thes e bands of scattered points. By contrast, in 

Figures 15b and 15e, the AE -K-PINN architecture demonstrates less scattered points than those in 

Figures 15a and 15d, with most points closely grouped along the diagonal line. This is due to the 

benefits of late nt space compression, which regularizes high -dimensional distribution functions and 

prevents overfitting. The U -Net -K-PINN architecture in Figures 15c and 15f demonstrates the most closely grouped points along both diagonals, with minimal scatter, especial ly in interfacial density 

regions. These points are nearly indistinguishable from ideal diagonal line representations, indicating 

strong agreement in these pointwise predictions and reference solutions. 

Comparing both surface types, Figures 15a -f show simi lar levels of scatter for both rough and textured 

surfaces, although textured surfaces demonstrate a higher level of scatter, which aligns with higher 

error metrics in Figure 14. The high density of points along both diagonals indicates strong agreement 

in phase -separated regions, with bulk liquid regions at ρ ≈ 6.5 -7 and bulk gas regions at ρ ≈ 0.15 -0.5, 

while errors are largely found in transitional interfacial regions where density gradients are highest. 

U-Net -K-PINN demonstrates strong mitigation of int erfacial errors, which are associated with both 

density and velocity fields, through its multiresolution features learned through skip connections, 

allowing networks to jointly capture both large -scale droplet features and small -scale interface 

features. 

Figure 16 . Error distribution histograms for textured surfaces (top row) and rough surfaces (bottom 

row). 

Figure 16 displays a set of histograms of error distributions, providing a statistical representation of 

prediction errors f or each architecture. The error distributions, shown in the histograms, indicate the 

frequency of error magnitudes at all spatiotemporal locations, where the x -axis represents the 

difference between predicted and true values, or predicted - true, density. For textured surfaces, as 

shown in the first row of Figure 16, where Figures 16a, 16b, and 16c represent the error distributions 

for the DNN -K-PINN, AE -K-PINN, and U -Net -K-PINN, respectively, we can see that the error 

distributions for the DNN -K-PINN model in Figure 16a tend to be concentrated around zero error 

with a certain level of scatter, where the standard deviations represent the scatter shown in Figure 15a. The error distributions tend to be Gaussian, indicating random errors. For the AE -K-PINN 

mode l, as shown in Figure 16b, we can see that error distributions tend to be more concentrated 

around zero error, indicating a reduced level of error variance. For the U -Net -K-PINN model, as 

shown in Figure 16c, we can see that error distributions tend to be more concentrated around zero 

error than those for the other two models, indicating a reduced level of error variance. 

For rough surfaces, similar trends are found, with U -Net -K-PINN in Figure 16f having the most 

concentrated error distribution centered cl osely around zero. The less concentrated error distribution 

for rough surfaces, in comparison to textured surfaces, is in line with the lower error metrics found 

in Figure 14, further confirming the observation that rough surfaces are marginally easier to model 

than periodic textures. The error histograms provide further information than the scatter plots, 

showing the statistical distribution of errors, not their spatial relationship with density values. The 

Gaussian distribution of errors supports the assu mption that errors are due to approximation 

uncertainties in neural network training, not errors in the physics -informed framework. The 

quantitative metrics, scatter plots, and error histograms provide convergent evidence to support the 

U-Net -K-PINN archit ecture having superior prediction capability over the baseline DNN -K-PINN 

and its enhanced counterparts, with significant improvements in multiple evaluation metrics: L 2,

RMSE, MAE, R 2, and statistically corroborated with pointwise correlation and error di stribution 

analysis. The U -Net architecture demonstrates 50 -75% reduction in error metrics over the baseline 

while retaining high computational efficiency in model inference. U -Net -K-PINN is therefore 

identified as the most suitable architecture for Lattic e-Boltzmann -based modeling of multiphase 

droplet spreading on complex surfaces, having found a balance of high accuracy, generalizability, 

and computational cost -effectiveness. 

4. Conclusion s

We demonstrate the physical accuracy and computational efficienc y of a novel framework, referred 

to as Lattice -Boltzmann -Driven Kinetic Physics -Informed Neural Networks (K -PINNs), for 

simulating dynamics of multiphase droplets on rough and structured surfaces. By directly 

incorporating the discrete Boltzmann -BGK model and its associated moment consistency conditions, 

K-PINNs enforce physical laws at the kinetic level, where interfacial forces, surface wettability, and 

contact line dynamics are inherently embedded. K -PINNs overcome existing PINN and data -driven 

lattice B oltzmann method (LBM) surrogates in terms of their physical consistency and accuracy, 

while achieving high prediction accuracy. On a wide variety of stochastically rough and periodically 

textured surfaces, K -PINNs successfully reproduce a number of signifi cant phenomena in surface 

wetting, such as contact line motion, deformation, and pinning/depinning, over a wide variety of 

surface textures and wettability conditions. From a variety of network architectures, K -PINN based on U -Net performed with the highes t accuracy, achieving a reduction in error by up to 75% in terms 

of L 2 norm over its fully connected counterparts. This is due to its encoder -decoder architecture with 

skip connections, which enables K -PINN to simultaneously resolve both global droplet mor phology 

and sharp interfacial gradients, which are characteristic of surface roughness in wetting phenomena. 

In addition to the high accuracy, the framework also shows high physical credibility. Mass 

conservation errors were less than 1.5%, and the tempora l evolution of the spreading dynamics 

followed well -established capillary -driven scaling laws, confirming the incorporation of causal 

kinetic physics into the learned solutions. Although the training process is computationally expensive, 

the developed mode ls can perform real -time inference at orders -of -magnitude lower computational 

cost than direct LBM simulation. As such, the high -fidelity simulation of multiphase physics is no 

longer limited to offline numerical computation. Overall, the current work prov ides the K -PINN 

framework as the continuous and physics -preserving equivalent to multiphase fluid physics on 

complex surfaces. As such, it opens the door to large -scale parametric studies, inverse wettability 

characterization, and surface optimization. Mor e generally, the current work shows the promise of 

using kinetic theory, not merely the macroscopic laws, to drive the development of new physics -

informed machine learning models. As such, it lays the groundwork for the application of physics -

informed mach ine learning to a much broader set of multiphase, multicomponent, and nonequilibrium 

fluid flow problems where the mesoscopic physics is dominant. 

References 

[1] H. Aminfar and M. Mohammadpourfard, “Droplets Merging and Stabilization by 

Electrowetting: Lattice Boltzmann Study,” J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. , vol. 26, no. 12 –17, pp. 1853 –

1871, Sep. 2012, doi: 10.1163/156856111X599616. 

[2] N. Amiri, J. M. Prisaznuk, P. Huang, P. R. Chiar ot, and X. Yong, “Deep -learning -enhanced 

modeling of electrosprayed particle assembly on non -spherical droplet surfaces,” Soft Matter ,

vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 613 –625, 2025, doi: 10.1039/D4SM01160K. 

[3] O. Arjmandi -Tash, N. M. Kovalchuk, A. Trybala, I. V. Kuch in, and V. Starov, “Kinetics of 

Wetting and Spreading of Droplets over Various Substrates,” Langmuir , vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 

4367 –4385, May 2017, doi: 10.1021/acs.langmuir.6b04094. 

[4] V. K. Babu, N. B. Padhan, and R. Pandit, “Liquid -Droplet Coalescence: CNN -based 

Reconstruction of Flow Fields from Concentration Fields,” Oct. 06, 2024, arXiv :

arXiv:2410.04451. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2410.04451. 

[5] E. Ezzatneshan and A. Khosroabadi, “Droplet spreading dynamics on hydrophobic textured 

surfaces: A lattice Boltzman n study,” Comput. Fluids , vol. 231, p. 105063, Dec. 2021, doi: 

10.1016/j.compfluid.2021.105063. 

[6] M. Miwa, A. Nakajima, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto, and T. Watanabe, “Effects of the Surface 

Roughness on Sliding Angles of Water Droplets on Superhydrophobic Surfaces,” Langmuir ,

vol. 16, no. 13, pp. 5754 –5760, Jun. 2000, doi: 10.1021/la991660o. 

[7] A. Nakajima, “Design of hydrophobic surfaces for liquid droplet control,” NPG Asia Mater. ,

vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 49 –56, May 2011, doi: 10.1038/asiamat.2011.55. [8] H. Liu, L. Nan, F. Chen, Y. Zhao, and Y. Zhao, “Functions and applications of artificial 

intelligence in droplet microfluidics,” Lab. Chip , vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2497 –2513, 2023, doi: 

10.1039/D3LC00224A. 

[9] X. Dong, Z. Li, and X. Zhang, “Contact -angle implem entation in multiphase smoothed particle 

hydrodynamics simulations,” J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. , vol. 32, no. 19, pp. 2128 –2149, Oct. 2018, 

doi: 10.1080/01694243.2018.1464092. 

[10] E. K. Ahangar, M. B. Ayani, J. A. Esfahani, and K. C. Kim, “Lattice Boltzmann simulation of 

diluted gas flow inside irregular shape microchannel by two relaxation times on the basis of wall 

function approach,” Vacuum , vol. 173, p. 109104, Mar. 2020, doi: 

10.1016/j.vacuum.2019.109104. 

[11] M. Ibrahim, A. S. Berrouk, T. Saeed, E. A. A lgehyne, and V. Ali, “Lattice Boltzmann -based 

numerical analysis of nanofluid natural convection in an inclined cavity subject to multiphysics 

fields,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 5514, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -022 -09320 -8. 

[12] X. Shan and H. Chen , “Lattice Boltzmann model for simulating flows with multiple phases and 

components,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 1815 –1819, Mar. 1993, doi: 

10.1103/PhysRevE.47.1815. 

[13] Zhenhua Chai, Z. Chai, Baochang Shi, and B. Shi, “Multiple -relaxation -time lat tice Boltzmann 

method for the Navier -Stokes and nonlinear convection -diffusion equations: Modeling, 

analysis, and elements.,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 102, no. 2, p. 023306, 2020, doi: 

10.1103/physreve.102.023306. 

[14] Linlin Fei et al. , “Mesoscopic simulation o f three -dimensional pool boiling based on a phase -

change cascaded lattice Boltzmann method,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 32, no. 10, p. 103312, 2020, doi: 

10.1063/5.0023639. 

[15] Huili Wang et al. , “A brief review of the phase -field -based lattice Boltzmann method f or 

multiphase flows,” Capillarity , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 33 –52, Oct. 2019, doi: 

10.26804/capi.2019.03.01. 

[16] C. Barnes, A. R. ( आीशर सोनवने ) Sonwane, E. C. Sonnenschein, and F. Del Giudice, “Machine 

learning enhanced droplet microfluidics,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 35, no. 9, p. 092003, Sep. 2023, 

doi: 10.1063/5.0163806. 

[17] V. Deepak and S. Vengadesan, “Droplet Velocity and Film Thickn ess Studies of an Elongated 

Taylor Droplet in a Microchannel and Characterization Using Machine Learning,” Ind. Eng. 

Chem. Res. , vol. 64, no. 17, pp. 8908 –8921, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1021/acs.iecr.5c00194. 

[18] Chibuzor N Obiora, Ali N. Hasan, and Ahmed Ali, “Predicting Solar Irradiance at Several Time 

Horizons Using Machine Learning Algorithms,” Sustainability , vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 8927 –8927, 

Jun. 2023, doi: 10.3390/su15118927. 

[19] T. Dong, J. -X. Wang, Y. Wang, G. -H. Tang, Y. Cheng, and W. -C. Yan, “Developme nt of 

machine learning based droplet diameter prediction model for electrohydrodynamic atomization 

systems,” Chem. Eng. Sci. , vol. 268, p. 118398, Mar. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.ces.2022.118398. 

[20] M. Jafari Gukeh, S. Moitra, A. N. Ibrahim, S. Derrible, and C . M. Megaridis, “Machine Learning 

Prediction of TiO 2 -Coating Wettability Tuned via UV Exposure,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces ,

vol. 13, no. 38, pp. 46171 –46179, Sep. 2021, doi: 10.1021/acsami.1c13262. 

[21] V. K. Babu, N. B. Padhan, and R. Pandit, “Convolut ional neural network based reconstruction 

of flow -fields from concentration fields for liquid -droplet coalescence,” Commun. Phys. , vol. 8, 

no. 1, pp. 1 –13, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1038/s42005 -025 -02097 -y. 

[22] N. Chen, S. Lucarini, R. Ma, A. Chen, and C. Cui, “ PF -PINNs: Physics -informed neural 

networks for solving coupled Allen -Cahn and Cahn -Hilliard phase field equations,” J. Comput. 

Phys. , vol. 529, p. 113843, May 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2025.113843. 

[23] M. Dreisbach, E. Kiyani, J. Kriegseis, G. Karniadakis, and A. Stroh, “PINNs4Drops: 

Convolutional feature -enhanced physics -informed neural networks for reconstructing two -

phase flows,” Nov. 28, 2024, arXiv : arXiv:2411.15949. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2411.15949. [24] J. Pu and Y. Chen, “Complex dynamics on the one -dimensional quantum droplets via time 

piecewise PINNs,” Phys. Nonlinear Phenom. , vol. 454, p. 133851, Nov. 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.physd.2023.133851. 

[25] X. Chu et al. , “Flow reconstruction over a SUBOFF model based on LBM -generated data and 

physics -informed neural networks,” Ocean Eng. , vol. 308, p. 118250, Sep. 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.oceaneng.2024.118250. 

[26] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and L. Yang, “Physics -

informed machine learning,” Nat. Rev. Phys. , vol. 3, no. 6, pp . 422 –440, May 2021, doi: 

10.1038/s42254 -021 -00314 -5. 

[27] A. Roy, A. Mukherjee, B. Prasad, and A. K. Nayak, “A computational analysis of flow dynamics 

and heat transfer in a wavy patterned channel using physics -informed neural networks,” Phys. 

Fluids , vol . 37, no. 4, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1063/5.0264160. 

[28] R. Sun et al. , “A physics -informed neural network framework for multi -physics coupling 

microfluidic problems,” Comput. Fluids , vol. 284, p. 106421, Nov. 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.compfluid.2024.106421. 

[29] P. Sharma, W. T. Chung, B. Akoush, and M. Ihme, “A Review of Physics -Informed Machine 

Learning in Fluid Mechanics,” Energies , vol. 16, no. 5, p. 2343, Jan. 2023, doi: 

10.3390/en16052343. 

[30] M. Starnoni, “Multiphase Flow and Coalescence Filtration in Fibro us Filters: A Review of 

Numerical and Machine Learning Approaches,” Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. , vol. 64, no. 47, pp. 

22515 –22539, Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1021/acs.iecr.5c03439. 

[31] C. Tang et al. , “Dynamics of droplet impact on solid surface with different roughness ,” Int. J. 

Multiph. Flow , vol. 96, pp. 56 –69, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2017.07.002. 

[32] A. B. D. Cassie and S. Baxter, “Wettability of porous surfaces,” Trans. Faraday Soc. , vol. 40, 

no. 0, pp. 546 –551, Jan. 1944, doi: 10.1039/TF94440005 46. 

[33] N. Mondal, V. Arya, P. Sarangi, and C. Bakli, “Interplay of roughness and wettability in 

microchannel fluid flows —Elucidating hydrodynamic details assisted by deep learning,” Phys. 

Fluids , vol. 36, no. 6, p. 062014, Jun. 2024, doi: 10.1063/5.02085 54. 

[34] D. Upadhaya, Talinungsang, P. Kumar, and D. D. Purkayastha, “Tuning the wettability and 

photocatalytic efficiency of heterostructure ZnO -SnO2 composite films with annealing 

temperature,” Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. , vol. 95, pp. 28 –34, Jun. 201 9, doi: 

10.1016/j.mssp.2019.02.009. 

[35] B. Yin, X. Xie, S. Xu, H. Jia, S. Yang, and F. Dong, “Effect of pillared surfaces with different 

shape parameters on droplet wettability via Lattice Boltzmann method,” Colloids Surf. 

Physicochem. Eng. Asp. , vol. 615 , p. 126259, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2021.126259. 

[36] S. Li, J. Yang, and A. Ansell, “Data -driven reduced -order simulation of dam -break flows in a 

wetted channel with obstacles,” Ocean Eng. , vol. 287, p. 115826, Nov. 2023, doi: 

10.1016/j.oceane ng.2023.115826. 

[37] B. Bhushan, M. Nosonovsky, and Y. C. Jung, “Towards optimization of patterned 

superhydrophobic surfaces,” J. R. Soc. Interface , vol. 4, no. 15, pp. 643 –648, Aug. 2007, doi: 

10.1098/rsif.2006.0211. 

[38] X. Zhu, X. Hu, and P. Sun, “Physi cs -Informed Neural Networks for Solving Dynamic Two -

Phase Interface Problems,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput. , vol. 45, no. 6, pp. A2912 –A2944, Dec. 2023, 

doi: 10.1137/22M1517081. 

[39] A. E. Siemenn, E. Shaulsky, M. Beveridge, T. Buonassisi, S. M. Hashmi, and I. Dro ri, “A 

Machine Learning and Computer Vision Approach to Rapidly Optimize Multiscale Droplet 

Generation,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 4668 –4679, Jan. 2022, doi: 

10.1021/acsami.1c19276. 

[40] Y. Zhuang, Q. Ye, N. Liu, X. Xie, H. Yan, and L. Zeng, “Hybrid physics -data -driven deep 

learning for pore -scale transport in microfluidic system,” Phys. Fluids , vol. 37, no. 7, p. 073363, 

Jul. 2025, doi: 10.1063/5.0271043. [41] S. Zhang, J. Tang, and H. Wu, “Simplified wetting boundary scheme in phase -field lattice 

Boltzmann model for wetting phenomena on curved boundaries,” Phys. Rev. E , vol. 108, no. 2, 

p. 025303, Aug. 2023, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.108.025303. 

[42] J. J. Huang, C. Shu, J. J. Feng, and Y. T. Chew, “A Phase -Field -Based Hybrid Lattice -

Bol tzmann Finite -Volume Method and Its Application to Simulate Droplet Motion under 

Electrowetting Control,” J. Adhes. Sci. Technol. , vol. 26, no. 12 –17, pp. 1825 –1851, Sep. 2012, 

doi: 10.1163/156856111X599607. 

[43] S. G. Bariki and S. Movahedirad, “A flow ma p for core/shell microdroplet formation in the co -

flow Microchannel using ternary phase -field numerical model,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 

22010, Dec. 2022, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -022 -26648 -3. 

[44] Z. Hashemi, M. Gholampour, M. C. Wu, T. Y. Liu, C. Y. Lian g, and C. -C. Wang, “A physics -

informed neural networks modeling with coupled fluid flow and heat transfer – Revisit of natural 

convection in cavity,” Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transf. , vol. 157, p. 107827, Sep. 2024, doi: 

10.1016/j.icheatmasstransfer.2024.107 827. 

[45] Junfeng Zhang et al. , “Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM),” Introd. Lattice Boltzmann Method ,

Jan. 2014, doi: 10.1007/springerreference_67034. 

[46] S. Zhang et al. , “Neural Network Prediction of Micrometer -Scale Equivalent Contact Angle 

Mapping: From Microforce Measurements to Local Wettability Characterization,” ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces , vol. 17, no. 43, pp. 59923 –59933, Oct. 2025, doi: 10.1021/acsami.5c17871. 

[47] N. Suetrong, T. Tosuai, H. Vo Thanh, W. Chantapakul, S. Tangparitkul, and N. Promsu k, 

“Predicting Dynamic Contact Angle in Immiscible Fluid Displacement: A Machine Learning 

Approach for Subsurface Flow Applications,” Energy Fuels , vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3635 –3644, Mar. 

2024, doi: 10.1021/acs.energyfuels.3c04251. 

[48] J. Chen, F. Yang, K. Lu o, Y. Wu, C. Niu, and M. Rong, “Study on contact spots of fractal rough 

surfaces based on three -dimensional Weierstrass -Mandelbrot function,” in 2016 IEEE 62nd 

Holm Conference on Electrical Contacts (Holm) , Oct. 2016, pp. 198 –204. doi: 

10.1109/HOLM.2016.7780032. 

[49] I. Akkaya, O. Arslan, and J. P. Rolland, “Automated and highly precise surface wetting contact 

angle measurement with optical coherence tomography based on deep learning model,” 

Measurement , vo l. 253, p. 117788, Sep. 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.measurement.2025.117788. 

[50] Shiyi Chen, S. Chen, Gary D. Doolen, and G. D. Doolen, “LATTICE BOLTZMANN METHOD 

FOR FLUID FLOWS,” Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 329 –364, Jan. 1998, doi: 

10.1146/annur ev.fluid.30.1.329. 

[51] C. Peng, L. F. Ayala, and O. M. Ayala, “A thermodynamically consistent pseudo -potential 

lattice Boltzmann model for multi -component, multiphase, partially miscible mixtures,” J. 

Comput. Phys. , vol. 429, p. 110018, Mar. 2021, doi: 10 .1016/j.jcp.2020.110018. 

[52] A. Hajisharifi, R. Halder, M. Girfoglio, A. Beccari, D. Bonanni, and G. Rozza, “A LSTM -

enhanced surrogate model to simulate the dynamics of particle -laden fluid systems,” Mar. 21, 

2024, arXiv : arXiv:2403.14283. Accessed: Aug. 12, 2024. [Online]. Available: 

http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14283