Title: Physics-Informed Neural Networks and Sequence Encoder: Application to heating and early cooling of thermo-stamping process

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26245v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:56:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
# Physics-Informed Neural Networks and Sequence Encoder: Application to heating and early cooling of thermo-stamping process 

Mouad ELAARABI a, Domenico BORZACCHIELLO a, Philippe LE BOT b, Nathan LAUZERAL b, Sebastien COMAS-CARDONA a

> aNantes Université, Ecole Centrale Nantes, CNRS, GeM, UMR 6183, Nantes, 44321, France
> bNantes Université, IRT Jules Verne, Bouguenais, 44340, France

Abstract 

In a previous work [1], the Sequence Encoder for online dynamical system identification [2] and its combination with PINN (PINN-SE) were introduced and tested on both synthetic and real data case scenarios. The sequence encoder is able to e ff ectively encode time series into feature vectors, which the PINN then uses to map to dynamical behavior, predicting system response under changes in parameters, ICs and BCs. Previously [1], the tests on real data were limited to simple 1D problems and only 1D time series inputs of the Sequence Encoder. In this work, the possibility of applying PINN-SE to a more realistic case is investigated: heating and early cooling of the thermo-stamping process, which is a critical stage in the forming process of continuous fiber reinforced composite materials with thermoplastic polymer. The possibility of extending the PINN-SE inputs to multimodal data, such as sequences of temporal 2D images and to scenarios involving variable geometries, is also explored. The results show that combining multiple encoders with the previously proposed method [1] is feasible, we also show that training the model on synthetic data generated based on experimental data can help the model to generalize well for real experimental data, unseen during the training phase. 

Keywords: Neural networks, physics informed machine learning, Thermo-stamping, composite materials, CNN 

List of Abbreviations AE Absolute Error 

APE Absolute Percentage Error 

BCs Boundary Conditions 

CNNs Convolutional Neural Networks 

FEM Finite Element Method 

GNNs Graph Neural Networks 

ICs Initial Conditions 

IoT Internet of Things 

IR Infrared 

MAE Mean Absolute Error 

MAPE Mean Absolute Percentage Error 

MLPs Multi-Layer Perceptrons 

ODE Ordinary Di ff erential Equation 

PA66 Polyamide 6-6 

PA66GF Polyamide 6-6 with Glass Fibers 

PDE Partial Di ff erential Equation 

PIML Physics-Informed Machine Learning 

PINN Physics-Informed Neural Network 

PINN-SE Physics-Informed Neural Network with Se-quence Encoder 

PP Polypropylene 

PPGF Polypropylene with Glass Fibers 

QC Quality of Contact 

QPs Query Points 

RNNs Recurrent Neural Networks 

SE Sequence Encoder 

TCR Thermal Contact Resistance 

VAE Variational Autoencoder 

> arXiv:2603.26245v1 [cs.CE] 27 Mar 2026

1. Introduction 

The development of industrial processes by the integration of new technologies such as IoT, cloud computing, robotics and machine learning has led to significant improvements in automation, monitoring and control. It enhanced the e ffi ciency of process by reducing defects and downtimes, while also improving overall quality. Real data plays a key role in any industrial process [3]. Di ff erent types of sensors can be employed to provide real-time visibility of process health [4], such as temperature, pressure, proximity sensors and even visual data (images). These sensors are capable of capturing information ranging from scalar values (1D) to complex 3D spatial data. Each of these data types needs to be analyzed di ff erently, while also considering their interconnections, in order to provide a full and clear picture of process performance. Handling diverse data streams from multiple sources in real time has become much easier with the development of IoT and its integration with cloud computing [5]. Such data can be used online via specific models to forecast process behavior and adjust parameters accordingly, or o ffl ine to gain a deeper understanding of process behavior with respect to parameters and external factors, which can then be exploited to improve the process itself. The recent development of PIML [6, 7] has shown that including prior physical knowledge of the process can improve model training and enhance generalizability. Di ff erent deep learning architectures have been developed to handle real-world data. For example, CNNs are widely used in diverse industrial contexts for image and video processing [8], RNNs for sequence data encoding and GNNs [9] for graph-based data (which can also be applied to image processing, since an image can be represented as a structured graph). The incorporation of prior knowledge into these models can be achieved either by modifying their architecture or by adjusting the training objective. For instance, CNNs [10] can be trained to preserve symmetry by adding a symmetry kernel to the architecture. NeuralODEs [11] construct neural network architectures that follow the Euler discretization scheme of the target ODE. Alternatively, prior knowledge can be included directly in the training loss, as in the case of PINNs [12]. In this context, it is important to have models that can both integrate prior knowledge and also handle diverse data sources. As an example, in the study of flow over an espresso cup [13], PINNs were trained to encode sequences of 3D temperature fields and then use governing equations (Navier-Stokes and heat transfer) to predict the 3D velocity and pressure fields in continuous time. Similarly, CNNs have been combined with PINNs [14] to extract local permeability during central injection molding, using images that capture the flow front (the propagation of liquid in the material). Other work [15] proposed an approach to tackle 3D thermomechanical problems using adaptive training of PINNs, while [16] studied the thermochemical evolution of polymerization in a composite material (thermoset polymer matrix) in contact with a tool. In the latter application, transfer learning was explored to minimize retraining time of PINNs when process parameters change. These studies highlight the potential of PINNs to leverage both data and physical constraints to achieve reliable predictions of thermo-stamping behavior. To sum up, incorporating image data into the training process provides a highly informative source. For this reason, the aim is to validate the model on its ability to encode such data. 

1.1. Problem definition 

The thermo-stamping process of composite [17] consists of heating a composite material plate above the thermo-plastic matrix melting temperature, after which it is transferred into a mould where it is formed into the desired shape held and cooled to obtain a consolidated part with the required final geometry. During the process, di ff erent sources of information can provide feedback on process health, such as pressure or force sensors during the stamping phase and temperature sensors during the heating, stamping and cooling phases. Thermal analysis is a particularly important source of information, as temperature strongly influences the process. It can a ff ect the friction mechanisms [18, 19] (ply-to-ply, ply-to-mold, inter-ply shears), as well as fiber movement (through the viscosity η of the polymer matrix, which itself depends on sheet temperature), which may lead to defects during stamping. To this extent, temperature may be considered the most important processing parameter [18]. In this work, the aim is to validate the proposed method [1] in a scenario close to real world thermo-stamping, where data sources are diverse (time series, sequences of 2D images, geometries ...). The main objective is to verify whether PINN-SE can map changes in process parameters to dynamics behavior. The focus will be on the thermal part of the process, namely the heating, transfer and contact with the colder mold, without considering the further forming stage. This choice is made for simplicity and also because temperature is the main source of information in the process and has a major impact on product quality. The main goal is to show that encoding di ff erent sources 2of information with PINN-SE is feasible, while accounting for variations in ICs, BCs and geometries and that it can handle spatio temporal problems using real data as input. The setup used in this study is presented in Fig. 1 and can be summarized as follows: 

Heating. Using an infrared oven, the composite sheet is heated to a surface target temperature Th. Once this temper-ature is reached, the heating stops automatically. 

Transfer. After heating, the sheet is taken out of the oven and exposed only to natural convection for 2 to 3 seconds. During this step, an IR camera is used to capture the top surface temperature of the sheet at z = H.

Mold & sheet contact. A mold (Fig. 1) is used to emulate the forming part of the thermo-stamping process. In this study, however, the focus is only on the cooling part of the sheet (the heat exchange between the low temperature mold and the hot sheet). During this step, thermocouples are used to measure the temperature of the mold at selected positions, while an IR camera captures the top surface temperature 2D field of the sheet.  

> Figure 1: Overview of the setup used to validate PINN-SE. This setup includes the three main steps of the thermo-stamping process, focusing only on the thermal evolution. An IR camera is mounted in a fixed position above the mold using a support arm, while the mold is actuated using a hydraulic cylinder and controlled by a control unit. The steps can be summarized as follows: (a) The sheet is first heated to a certain temperature
> Thusing an infrared (IR) oven. (b) The sheet is then taken out of the oven, where it is exposed to natural convection during the transfer phase. (c) Finally a cold mold is raised to establish thermal contact, emulating the cooling step of the stamping phase.

1.2. Paper contributions 

In this study, the aim is to use PINN-SE with CNNs to encode thermal images, thermocouple data and the positions of contact of the Mold & sheet (which may change between tests) during the convection part (Fig. 1 (b)), in order to predict the transient temperature during the contact phase (Fig. 1 (c)). The main contributions of this work are the following: 

• Extension of the application of PINN-SE to sequences of 2D thermal image real data 

• Extension of PINN-SE to multi-encoder inputs 

• Application of PINN-SE using real data from heating and early cooling of thermo-stamping 

1.3. Outline of the Paper 

To elaborate this work, this paper is divided as follows: in Sec. 2, the experimental setup and procedure are pre-sented, along with the samples used. Next in Sec. 3, the synthetic data generation for PINN-SE training is presented. The model training, architecture and results are given in Sec. 4. The results of this work are then analyzed and discussed in Sec. 4.4. A conclusion and some perspectives of the work is then given in Sec. 5. 32. Approach for Generating Experimental Real Data 

To validate the model, diverse conditions and materials are used. This means changing the heating temperature of the sheet, the boundary conditions by adjusting the initial temperature of the mold and the area /position of contact between the mold and the sheet. For the materials, two types of sheets with di ff erent polymers and di ff erent thicknesses are used. In this section, the samples, the details of the experimental process and the processing of the experimental data are presented. 

2.1. Materials 2.1.1. Samples 

For this experiment, two types of sheets (Tab. 1) are used. A digital caliper was used to measure the thickness of each sample at its four corners and the thickness of each sample is defined as the average of these four measurements. 

> Table 1: Summary of sheets: fiber type, polymer matrix, thickness, fabric type, warp-to-weft ratio and number of plies.

Material Fiber Polymer Matrix Thickness (mm) Fabric Warp to Weft Ratio Number of Plies 

PA66GF E-glass PA66 1.5 ± 0.008 Twill 2/2 3PPGF E-glass PP 2.3 ± 0.05 Twill 2/2 2The properties of the constituents of each sheet are given in Tab. 2. Both sheet types have nominal square geome-tries of 25cm × 25cm. In this experiment, 6 samples of PA66GF sheets and 4 samples of PPGF sheets are used. These samples were selected without any pre-requirements from a set of sheets. The main idea is to create a model based on a small number of samples. 

> Table 2: Material properties of E-glass Fiber [20], PP [21, 22] and PA66 [21, 22].

Property E-glass PP PA66 Units 

Density ( ρ) 2580 910 1140 kg /m3

Specific Heat Capacity ( Cp) 830 1610 1460 J/(kg ·K) Thermal Conductivity ( λ) 1.0 0.22 0.2 W/(m ·K) 

2.1.2. Infrared Oven 

For the samples heating, an infrared oven is used, which can heat both sides (top and bottom) simultaneously (SOPARA FOUR IRM 48 kW - 400 V). This oven operates in the mid-infrared, around 2.6 micrometers [23], a technology that heats the surface of the sheet, which is then transferred inside the sheet by conduction. Two optical pyrometers are installed inside the oven, one on the top and one on the bottom. These sensors are used to capture local temperatures during heating. An automated system is used to control the heating setup. It allows setting the target temperature Ttarget , the overall power level (0 - 100%) and controlling the top and bottom heating independently with di ff erent power percentages. The response time tresp (the time to reach the defined power percentages) and the holding time thold (used to maintain the sheet at Ttarget ) can also be configured. For all experiments, the response time tresp is set to it minimum value (1 s) and heating is stopped once Ttarget is reached on both the top or bottom of the sheet. 

2.1.3. Infrared Camera 

For these tests, the ImageIR ® 5300 from InfraTec GmbH is used. This camera can capture thermal images at a resolution of 320 ×256, with a total of 81,920 detectors. It can be calibrated to measure temperatures over di ff erent ranges, with a theoretical accuracy of 99% ± 1%. The acquisition frame rate is set to 2 fps is used for all tests. The camera comes with IRBIS 3 software, which allows configuring internal parameters such as the emissivity of the target, the distance between the target and the camera and the ambient temperature to correct the measured temperatures. The software also enables capturing and saving thermographic images along with additional metadata, including the configured emissivity, ambient temperature and timespan for each snapshot. 42.1.4. Mold 

A specific mold geometry (Top view in Fig. 2a) with a thickness of 1.2 cm is used. The main idea was to employ a non-symmetrical shape in order to create edge e ff ects during the thermal contact with the sheets as it occurs industrially. The mold is made of steel and three thermocouples were positioned close to edges in its lateral surface (Fig. 2b) to measure the mold temperature before and during the contact with the sheets. The thermocouples are connected to a thermocouple box and acquired through the TracerDAQ software. 

> (a) Mold geometry.
> (b) The thermocouple sensors were positioned on the lateral surface of the mold and fixed in using polyimide heat resistant tape.
> Figure 2: Top view of the mold geometry and thermocouple positions.

2.2. Experimental setup 

The experimental setup (mold, IR oven, IR camera) is displayed in Fig. 1. Data is recorded along the last two phases (b) and (c). The camera is mounted using a camera arm, which both fixes its position for all experiments and ensures that the camera view is perpendicular to the object of interest (sheets). The mold is mounted on a controlled hydraulic cylinder. During the heating, the hydraulic cylinder is set to its low position. The sheet heating is controlled using the oven automation system: 100% heating power is used and the oven is set to heat equally from top and bottom. The target temperature of PA66GF and PPGF sheets is set to 190 ◦C and 130 ◦ respectively. Once the target temperature is reached, the heating stops and recording is started for both the camera and the mold thermocouples. The oven drawer is then slid out and during this phase there is no contact between the sheet and the mold. The sheet is exposed only to natural convection. A few seconds later (2-3 seconds), the mold is raised using the hydraulic cylinder, to establish contact with the sheet. 5(a) The temperature patterns at the surface after heating (phase (b) in Fig. 1) of the PA66GF sheets. 

> (b) The temperature patterns at the surface after heating (phase (b) in Fig. 1) of the PPGF sheets.
> Figure 3: Top view of Temperature patterns after heating of the PA66GF and PPGF sheets of the samples used in these experiments.

2.3. Synthesis experimental data overview 

In this section, the process of data extraction and processing for each experiment is briefly introduced. The thermal images are logged as text files (2D floating matrices of 320 × 256) along with metadata such as the snapshot time, sequence order and the configuration parameters such as the set ambient temperature and emissivity. The thermocouple data are stored as .csv files with four columns, time and temperature at the three positions (Fig. 2b). The main goal of this experiment is to generate a dataset under varied conditions, including the use of two di ff erent material sheets with distinct characteristics such as materials properties and thickness. The top surface temperature patterns are varied by translating horizontally the sheets in the IR oven, generating di ff erent thermal patterns (Fig. 3) and by changing the contact position between the mold and the sheet (Fig. 4). 6(a) The temperature patterns at the surface 15 seconds after contact with the mold (phase (c) in Fig. 1) of the PA66GF sheets. 

> (b) The temperature patterns at the surface 15 seconds after contact with the mold (phase (c) in Fig. 1) of the PPGF sheets.

Figure 4: Top view of temperature patterns at the surface 15 seconds after contact with the mold of the PA66GF and PPGF sheets for all the samples used in this experiments. 

During these experiments, the thermal contact resistance (TCR) (Fig. 5), are expressed [24] as : 

Rs = Tmold − Tsheet 

ϕ , [Rs] = m2 ·◦ C/W (1) Where Tmold and Tsheet are the temperatures near the contact surface and ϕ is the heat flux within the contact interface. The TCR between the sheet and mold can impede heat transfer and thus reduce the e ffi ciency of thermal contact. In this case, it is not negligible and is spatially variable (up to 40 ◦C di ff erence observed across the sheet surface) and highly variable from one experiment to another, which adds a challenge to model validation. For polymer interfaces, this parameter depends on the surface roughness, the applied pressure, the gap thickness between the mold and sheet, as well as on time and temperature [25]. Estimating this parameter is crucial to evaluate the true heat transfer and, 7consequently, the quality of the stamping process. The boundary condition can be simplified as in Eq. 2 for contact in the z direction: 

−k ∂T

∂z = hc(T − Tmold ), (x, y) ∈ ΓC (2) 

> Figure 5: Illustration of heat transfer between two surfaces with asperities. The thermal contact resistance defines the quality of the contact and consequently the e ffi ciency of heat transfer.

In this preliminary study, it is assumed that the TCR is constant (in time and with respect to temperature) and varies in position ( x, y). It is estimated using a numerical inverse method by simulating the contact between the mold and the sheet. The approach used defines the interface resistance as a function proportional to the temperature di ff erence between two instances: 15 seconds after contact, T H 

> end

and the initial temperature at the first contact with the mold, T H

> init

, at the surface z = H. This temperature di ff erence is then normalized using min-max scaling to have values between 0 and 1 (Fig. 6). In this study the heat transfer coe ffi cient hc is approximated using this assumption as (Eq. 3): 

hc ∝ (T H 

> init

− T H

> end

)

hc = 1/Rs

Rs = A (1 − normalized( T H 

> init

− T H

> end

)) + B

(3) Where Rs is the thermal contact resistance. The choice of this function is based on the fact that the cooling of the sheet depends on the heat exchange between the mold and the sheet, which is highly influenced by hc. For simplicity, a linear function is chosen to represent the proportional relationship between these variables. Using FEM in COMSOL 5.2 as the solver, the values of A and B (Eq. 3) for PPGF and PA66GF sheets are identified separately by minimizing the average error (Eq. 4) across all samples between the simulation and the surface temperature measured by the IR camera. argmin  

> A′,B′

T H (t = 15 s, x; A, B)isim − T H (t = 15 s, x)iexp 1 (4) where sim and exp represent respectively the simulation and experimental data. One optimal set of parameters is identified for each material: APP = 140 m 2 ·◦ C/W and BPP = 10 −4 m2 ·◦ C/W for all PPGF samples and APA =

145 m 2 ·◦ C/W and BPA = 1.05 × 10 −4 m2 ·◦ C/W for PA66GF samples. For the sake of simplicity and to have a uniform image shape for model training (CNN), a crop is applied to both the PA66GF and PPGF image data to achieve a consistent shape. The cropped image has a square dimension of 20.7 cm, which will be the focus for the rest of this study. A summary of the QC for PA66GF and PPGF experiments is given in Figs. 7 and 8 respectively. To conclude, experiment data sets for 6 PA66GF sheets and 4 PPGF sheets have been acquired and the corre-sponding approximated coe ffi cient Rs and QC have been identified for di ffi rent sheet and mold positions. With all this variability, training the PINN-SE directly using limited amount of real data would be challenging. In the next section, we explain how synthetic data with similar patterns to the experimental data is generated and used to train the PINN-SE, which is then validated on experimental data. 8Figure 6: Example of the top view normalized temperature di ff erence, normalized( T H 

> init

− T H

> end

), for PPGF sheets used to approximate the contact heat transfer coe ffi cient hc.

Figure 7: The Quality of Contact representation for all PA66GF sheets experiments. 

9Figure 8: The Quality of Contact representation for all PPGF sheets experiments. 

3. Generating synthetic data 

3.1. Simulation methodology 

The FEM simulation of the process is performed using COMSOL 5.2 software. The simulation is divided into two steps corresponding to the second and third steps (b and c) of the process (Fig. 1). The heating step is not simulated. The top surface temperature (e.g., Fig. 3) from synthetic results is used as the initial condition for the simulation of the second and third steps of the process (Fig. 1). 

General configuration:. The initial temperature of the sheets is defined using a .csv file containing the top surface temperature at z = H. Then, using an interpolation function inside COMSOL, the temperature within the sheets is defined using a linear function. In this step, the material properties and geometries, including the mold positions relative to the sheets, are also defined using a .csv file containing the polygon coordinates corresponding to the mold nodes. The sheet thickness is defined as a variable parameter that can be easily changed from one simulation to another. Additionally, the quality of contact is configured using a .csv file containing values between 0 and 1 and the coordinates of each value. 

Part 1 of the simulation:. This corresponds to the second part (b) in Fig. 5. In this phase, the heated sheet is exposed only to convection. For simplicity, the duration of this phase is fixed and set to 2 seconds for all simulations, with a heat transfer coe ffi cient h = 10 W /(m 2.K) and T∞ = 300 K. The initial condition is defined as described in the 10 previous paragraph. The 3D transient heat conduction equation for the sheet during this phase is defined as (Eq. 5): 

∂T

∂t = α∇2T, (x, y, z) ∈ Ω, t > 0,

−k ∂T

∂z = h(T − T∞), (x, y, z) ∈ ΓR,

−k ∂T

∂z = 0, (x, y, z) ∈ ΓI ,

T (t = 0, x, y, z) = T0(x, y, z), (x, y, z) ∈ Ω.

(5) Where α is the di ff usivity, ΓR are the surface where z ∈ { 0, H} and ΓI represent the lateral surface of the sheet. 

Part 2 of the simulation:. The results of simulation 1 (convection phase) are used as initial conditions to simulate the third part of the process, which corresponds to the contact between the sheet and the mold. In this phase, the initial temperature of the mold is a parameter that can vary between simulations. The duration of this phase is fixed to 10 seconds for all simulations. The quality of contact is used to set Rs, which is read from a .csv file and varies from one simulation to another. For PA66GF sheet simulations, APA and BPA are applied and similarly APP and BPP for PPGF sheets. The 3D transient heat conduction equation of the sheet during this phase is defined as (Eq. 6): 

∂T

∂t = α∇2T, (x, y, z) ∈ Ω, t > 0,

−k ∂T

∂z = h(T − T∞), (x, y, z) ∈ ΓR, (z = H)

−k ∂T

∂z = hc(T − Tmold ), (x, y, z) ∈ ΓC , (z = 0) 

−k ∂T

∂z = 0, (x, y, z) ∈ ΓI ,

T (t = 0, x, y, z) = T0(x, y, z), (x, y, z) ∈ Ω.

(6) where ΓR represents the surfaces at z = 0 (except the contact surface) and z = H , ΓC represents the contact surface with the mold and ΓI represents the lateral surfaces of the sheet. Some examples of simulation results are given in Fig. 9, along with processed experimental data. 

3.2. Data generations 

The number of experiments is very small for PINN-SE training and there is a lot of variability from one experiment to another. To overcome this limitation, data augmentation via simulation is used to generate a set of samples that matches the distribution observed in the real experiments. For each simulation the following were generated: 

Surface temperature and QC patterns:. A combination of CNNs and Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [26] was used. This kind of hybrid (CNN +VAE) has been used in image generation tasks (face synthesis tasks, [27]). In this work, a simple architecture was used to generate new surface temperature patterns (Figs. 3) and new QC patterns (Figs. 7 and 8). The idea is to train a probabilistic generative model that maps input data images x into a latent space z via an encoder Encoder( x) = qϕ(z | x) and reconstructs it using a decoder Decoder( z) = pθ(x | z), such that x ≈ Decoder( z), where θ and ϕ are trainable parameters. Unlike deterministic autoencoders, the VAE is stochastic. The latent vector z

is described by a distribution and the encoder outputs parameters of that distribution (commonly a mean and variance for each latent dimension). Training minimizes a reconstruction loss together with the Kullback-Leibler divergence between the approximate posterior qϕ(z | x) and a chosen prior p(z) (normal distribution N(0, I)), which regularizes the latent space to be consistent with training distribution. The decoder then maps samples from the latent distribution back to data space, producing outputs that follow the training data distribution. Two CNN-VAE models are employed, one for temperature patterns and another for QC patterns. Both encoder and decoder networks are CNN-based. The temperature images shown in Figs. 3 are normalized separately for PA66GF and PPGF (each material normalized 11 Figure 9: Example of data generated by simulation versus a processed experimental data. 

Figure 10: Overview of the CNN-VAE architecture. 

12 with respect to its own dataset) to scale values into [0 , 1]. After normalization, one VAE is trained for the temperature patterns (based on both PA66GF and PPGF data). The same procedure is applied to QC images. Once the models (Fig. 10) are trained, latent vectors are sampled from a normal distribution and fed into the decoder to generate new datasets. Some examples of QC datasets produced by the trained VAE model are shown in Fig. 11. The details of the architecture are provided in Appendix A. The generated QC and temperature are then exported to .csv files, which are subsequently used to run the FEM simulations as explained in Sec. 3.1. 

> Figure 11: Examples of the QC generated using the VAE model.

Mold position with respect to the sheet:. The contact position between the sheet and the mold is generated randomly. A set of polygon coordinates (representing the mold with respect to the sheet) is created and these configurations are then used to both PA66GF and PPGF simulations. 

Material properties:. Di ff erent material properties are obtained by varying the fiber volume fraction V f of PA66GF and PPGF within ±5% since the nominal value of V f may slightly vary from one sheet to another. 13 Initial temperature of the mold:. The initial mold temperature at the first instant of contact with the sheet is selected randomly between 25 ◦C and 35 ◦C for both PA66GF and PPGF simulations, which corresponds to the real experiments data. A combination of these variations is then used to generate 100 simulations for PA66GF sheets and 100 simulations for PPGF sheets, which are then used to train the model. For each simulation, the configuration used is saved, which includes the top surface temperature, the QC, the mold position, the sheet thickness and the thermal properties, alongside the simulation results. For each simulation, the results of the first part (Sec. 3.1) are stored at 5 instances, defined as tprior = kt 0 

> 4

where k ∈ [0 , 1, . . . , 4], where t0 = 2s, at z = H with a surface grid of 161 × 161. For the second part of the simulation, the temperature is saved at 11 instances, defined as tpost = kt f 

> 10

where k ∈

[0 , 1, . . . , 10], at 5 positions z = kH  

> 4

where k ∈ [0 , 1, 2, 3, 4], where t f = 10 s, with a surface grid of 161 × 161. An example of simulation generated data and experimental data is given in Fig. 9. This dataset is then used to train the PINN-SE model. In the next Sec. 4, the data preparation process for model training is detailed alongside the model architecture and its training strategy, with results on both the validation dataset and real data. 

4. Integrating CNNs, Deep Sets and PINNs for Thermal Monitoring 

The raw data generated above from the simulations require pre-processing before being used to train the PINN-SE, which is described in Sec. 4.1. The model architecture is then introduced in Sec. 4.2, followed by a discussion of the training strategy in Sec. 4.3 and finally, the results are presented and analysed in Sec. 4.4. 

4.1. Data Preparation 

Each simulation is divided into input and output. The input data is further split into two types: the first corresponds to the encoder part of the model (details in Sec. 4.2), which in this case includes the simulation results of the convection phase only (first part, Sec. 3.1), the QC corresponding to the simulation, the initial temperature of the mold, the thickness of the sheet and the coordinates of the mold polygon. The second type of input corresponds to the PINN part, which is the space-time points at which the temperature is to be predicted. The output is the temperature at these space-time points. After structuring each simulation into input-output datasets, the data is divided into three sets, a training set with 70% of the simulations (140 datasets) randomly selected and two 15% sets for testing and validation, respectively. In this study, it is assumed that the quality of contact (QC) is known. The main objective is to validate whether the model can capture the changes in QC and update its predictions accordingly. 

4.2. Model Architecture 

The model architecture overview is given in Fig. 12, while the detailed architecture is provided in Appendix B. The Encoder part of the model comprises four components. The first is a CNN that encodes the top surface temperature during the convection phase (first part Sec. 3.1, corresponding to part (b) in Fig. 1). This CNN encodes a sequence of surface temperature images representing the cooling of the sheet due to convection. Each image has dimensions ICs ∈ RH×W , with H = 161 and W = 161. The CNN then generates a feature vector for each image in the sequence. This feature vector is concatenated with its corresponding time value, adding temporal information and enabling the Deep Set to capture time dependencies. A Deep Set is then used to encode the temporal dimension of these latent vectors. This approach was used in [29] to encode CNN outputs from a sequence of driver images for head pose detection. The process can be summarized as in Eq. 7: 

CNN (T (t = ti)) = zi ∈ RB× f v 1 where Ti ∈ RB×161 ×161 ti ∈ { 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2}

concatenate( {ti, zi}) = Fvect ∈ RB×Nt ×( f v ′ 

> 1+1)

where Nt = nbr of thermal images 

DeepSet (Fvect ) = F1 ∈ RB× f1

(7) Where B is the batch size (the number of sets per training step). The second component of the encoder is a CNN that encodes the QC (with the coordinates of each pixel). The input dimension of QC fed to the model is QC ∈ RH×W×C ,where H = 91 and W = 59 represent the height and width of the image and C = 3 represents the number of channels. 14 Figure 12: An overview of the PINN-SE architecture used in this application. The PINN-SE can be divided into three parts. The Encoder is composed of four sub modules: the first encodes a sequence of images representing the temperature during the convection phase of the process (part (b) in Fig. 1) using a CNN and Deep Sets. The second model is a CNN that encodes the Quality of Contact, QC ∈ RH×W×C . The third and fourth models are simple MLPs that encode mold coordinates, sheet thickness and initial contact temperature. Each model produces a feature vector Fi ∈ RB× fi , i ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4}, which are concatenated to form Z ∈ RB×(P4 

> i=1fi)

. The second main part is the Space-time Encoder, which encodes spatio-temporal data into Query Points using Fourier feature layers [28] and an MLP. The final part is the PINN, which takes the concatenation of QPs and Z as input. In this work, two MLP are used and their outputs are summed to give the final temperature prediction. 

15 The first channel corresponds to the QC values, while the second and third channels represent the corresponding spatial coordinates (Eq. 8): 

CNN (QC ) = F2 ∈ RB× f2 (8) An MLP is used to encode the polygon coordinates (8 points in total, each with x and y coordinates, 16 values in total). The last encoder is an MLP for the initial temperature of the mold and the thickness of the sheets. Each encoder generates a feature vector Fi ∈ RB× fi , with i ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4}, which are then concatenated to produce Z ∈

RB×P4  

> i=1fi

= Z ∈ RB× f . The second part of the model encodes the space-time input data before feeding it to the PINN. Fourier feature layers [28] are used to encode the x and y dimensions. The output is then concatenated with z (space) and time t and fed into an MLP that encodes all spatio-temporal data to generate Query Points (QPs). Fourier feature layers are applied only to x and y because the temperature varies significantly in these dimensions, which helps the model converge faster. This step can be summarized as in Eq. 9: FFl( x) = FM ∈ RB×Nx× f f m , x = (x, y)concatenate(FM , z, t) = QPs prior ∈ RB×Nx×( f f m +2) 

MLP(QPs prior ) = QPs ∈ RB×Nx× fqps 

(9) Where FFl represents the Fourier feature layer and it encoding dimension is f f m and Nx the number of space-time points at which the temperature is predicted. In this work, two MLPs are used to represent the PINNs. The predictions of both models are summed to give the final temperature prediction. This approach was tested in [1] and it showed very good results for model convergence. Each MLP takes as input the concatenation of the Query Points (QPs) and Z j ∈ RB× f ′

where j ∈ { 1, 2} and 2 f ′ = f . Both Z j have the same dimension and therefore f needs to be even. An essential step that helps model convergence is the creation of a direct connection between the QC and the QPs. This is done by calculating the distance between the QPs and the QC coordinates, which then allows the model to approximate the QC at the QPs. This approach is inspired by attention mechanisms, where the model encodes the relationships between its inputs. With this approach, each QP has a di ff erent weight, represented by the QC values. 

4.3. Model Training Process 

For each simulation (element of batch) the encoder model takes as input the QC, thickness, initial temperature of the mold, the polygon coordinates and a sequence of thermal images of the convection phase. Since the Deep Set can handle di ff erent sequence lengths, the model is trained with di ff erent thermal image sequence lengths (1-5 thermal images), which allows predictions and updating as new data comes in. All encoder inputs are normalized to values between 0-1, which helps the model training convergence. For each batch, the time-space encoder is used to encode the ICs, BCs points and PDE collocation points. Note here that the PINN is used to solve only the thermal contact step of the process (Eq. 6), while the convection step data are used by the encoder (such as sequence of thermal images). To train the model, a similar approach as in [1] is used. The loss function to optimize is defined as (Eq. 10): 

Ltotal = β(LSUP + LICs + LBCs ) + λLPDE + γLl1 ,

LSUP = ∥T (t, x, z = H

2 ) − eT (t, x, z = H

2 )∥2 x = (x, y)

LICs = ∥T (t = 0, x, z) − eT (t = 0, x, z)∥2

LBCs = ∥T (t, x, z) − eT (t, x, z)∥2 z ∈ 0, H

LPDE = ∥ ∂T

∂t − α∇2T ∥1

(10) Where LSUP is the supervised loss. In this work, the temperature at z = H 

> 2

is used to help model training. This is not mandatory but it helps the model convergence speed. LPDE is the physics residual, LICs is the initial condition loss and LBCs represents the boundary condition loss. For simplicity, for the training Dirichlet conditions are used instead of flux based conditions, since the simulations enforce the original flux conditions. The parameters β and λ

are used to give di ff erent weights to the losses. In this work β = 10, while λ is dynamically variable depending on the supervised loss LSUP . The term Ll1 represents the L1 regularization applied to all layers of the model, with a regularization coe ffi cient γ = 10 −6. The model training strategy is summarized in Algo. 1. 16 Algorithm 1 Training strategy of PINN-SE for 3D transient heat conduction equation.  

> 1:

Initialize parameters:  

> 2:

β = 10  

> 3:

λ = 0 

> 4:

first_time_met = True  

> 5:

Initialize learning rate lr = 10 −3 

> 6:

for each epoch e in training do  

> 7:

Compute loss components: LSUP , LICs , LBCs , LPDE , Ll1  

> 8:

Compute total loss: β(LSUP + LICs + LBCs ) + λLPDE + γLl1  

> 9:

Update physics loss parameter:  

> 10:

if Sup loss < thr0 then  

> 11:

if first_time_met then  

> 12:

first_time_met = False  

> 13:

λ = 10 −8 

> 14:

else  

> 15:

λ = λ × (1 + 10 −3) 

> 16:

λ = min(1 , λ ) 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

else  

> 19:

if not first_time_met then  

> 20:

λ = λ × (1 − 10 −2) 

> 21:

λ = max(10 −8, λ ) 

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

end if  

> 24:

Update learning rate:  

> 25:

if lr > 2 × 10 −4 then  

> 26:

lr = lr × 9.9992 × 10 −1 

> 27:

else if lr > 10 −4 then  

> 28:

lr = lr × 9.9999 × 10 −1 

> 29:

end if  

> 30:

if e mod 5000 = 0 then  

> 31:

lr = lr × 9.0 × 10 −1 

> 32:

end if  

> 33:

end for 

17 4.4. Results and Discussion 

To train the model, 70% of the dataset is selected randomly. An optimal model is selected based on the test loss results. For the model validation, 15% of the dataset unseen during the training is kept. The model is validated based on its prediction at z = kH  

> 4

k ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} for synthetic data (validation dataset) and the model prediction at z = H

is also validated for real data. To assess the model prediction error, two metrics are used, the MAPE (Mean Absolute Percentage Error) and MAE (Mean Absolute Error). Since the data has no outliers and is not intermittent, without zero values, using MAPE is a suitable metric to validate the model [30], while the MAE gives the real temperature error of the model. 

Validation on synthetic data:. The model predictions are evaluated using thermal image sequences of varying lengths (2 to 5 frames) as input to the encoder (Fig. 12). The assessment is performed at five discrete positions along the thickness, z = kH  

> 4

with k ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} (Fig. 9), over the entire surface x = (x, y) ∈ [0 , 0.207] × [0 , 0.207] discretized on a 161 × 161 grid and at five time instances t = kt f 

> 10

, k ∈ { 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 }. The MAPE and MAE are calculated for each dataset as in Eq. 11 and Eq. 12: APE( x; ti, zi) = | ˆT (x, zi, ti) − T (x, zi, ti)||T (x, zi, ti)| × 100 ,

MAPE j = 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

APE j(x), d j ∈ D val , j = 1, . . . , Nval 

(11) AE( x; ti, zi) = | ˆT (x, zi, ti) − T (x, zi, ti)|,

MAE j = 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

AE j(x), d j ∈ D val , j = 1, . . . , Nval (12) Where ˆ T represents the model prediction and T presents the simulation results (ground truth). To provide a compre-hensive picture of model accuracy, the mean, the 50% (median) and 90% percentiles of MAPE are reported over all validation datasets. The same procedure is applied to the MAE metric. The definitions of these metrics are given in Eq. 13 for MAPE and Eq. 14 for MAE .

Qq(MAPE( ti, zi)) = inf nη : 1

|D val |

X 

> dj∈D val

I(MAPE j ≤ η) ≥ q; d j ∈ D val , j = 1, . . . , Nval 

o, q ∈ { 0.5, 0.9},

MAPE( ti, zi) = 1

Nval 

X 

> dj∈D val

MAPE j.

(13) 

Qq(MAE( ti, zi)) = inf nη : 1

|D val |

X 

> dj∈D val

I(MAE j ≤ η) ≥ q; d j ∈ D val , j = 1, . . . , Nval 

o, q ∈ { 0.5, 0.9},

MAE( ti, zi) = 1

Nval 

X 

> dj∈D val

MAE j.

(14) The results are given in Fig. 13 and 14. Based on these results, it can be seen that the model generalizes well for the validation data and was also able to use the physics to give accurate predictions at z = kH  

> 4

k ∈ { 1, 3}, which were not provided to the model during its training. The 90% percentile could be seen as a confidence factor of the model error; for both metrics, the model error is small. However, the model prediction is better for z >= H 

> 4

, while its prediction is less accurate at z = 0. This could be explained by the fact that the temperature di ff erence at the contact surface is high (in the contact region the temperature is low and in the convection region the temperature is high) and also from z = 0 to z = H 

> 4

the temperature di ff erence is very high, which perturbs the model prediction and training. Changing the training strategy of the model, especially by tuning the physics loss parameter λ and selecting random collocation points in regions where the residual is big [31], should help improve these results. Some examples of the model prediction versus the simulation results are given in Figs. 15 and 16 at z = H 

> 4

and z = 3H 

> 4

.18 Figure 13: Model performance across di ff erent spatial locations ( z = kH  

> 4

k ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 }), using MAE metrics and using only 2 thermal images as input to the encoder. The figure summarizes the mean, median and 90th percentile errors of the model, as defined in Eq. 14, across all validation datasets. 

Figure 14: Model performance across di ff erent spatial locations ( z = kH  

> 4

k ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} and t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 }), using MAPE (in %) metric and using only 2 thermal images as input to the encoder. The table summarizes the mean and 90th percentile errors of the model, as defined in Eq. 13, across all validation datasets. 

19 Figure 15: Exemple of model results of top view surface temperature for validation dataset at z = H 

> 4

and t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 } (columns), the first line represents the model prediction, the second presents the simulation results (ground truth) and the last one represents the Absolute Error between prediction and simulation. 

Figure 16: Exemple of model results of top view surface temperature for validation dataset at z = 3H 

> 4

and t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 5, 7, 10 } (columns), the first line represents the model prediction, the second presents the simulation results (ground truth) and the last one represents the Absolute Error between prediction and simulation. 

20 Validation on real data:. The model is validated on experimental data for all experiments using the same metrics, 

MAPE and MAE only at z = H (versus data from thermal images) at 6 instances ti = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 }. For each dataset, the MAPE , the median and 90% percentile of APE with respect to surface x = (x, y) are calculated as given in Eq. 15 and Eq. 16. APE( x; ti, z = H) = | ˆT (x, z = H, ti) − T (x, z = H, ti)||T (x, z = H, ti)| × 100 ,

MAPE i, j = 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

APE i, j(x), d j ∈ D Exp , j = 1, . . . , Nval 

Qq(APE j(ti, z = H)) = inf nη : 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

I(APE i, j ≤ η) ≥ q; x ∈ X o, q ∈ { 0.5, 0.9},

(15) AE( x; ti, z = H) = | ˆT (x, z = H, ti) − T (x, z = H, ti)|,

MAE i, j = 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

AE i, j(x), d j ∈ D Exp , j = 1, . . . , Nval 

Qq(AE j(ti, z = H)) = inf nη : 1

|X| 

X

> x∈X

I(AE i, j ≤ η) ≥ q; x ∈ X o, q ∈ { 0.5, 0.9},

(16) The results using the PA66GF sheet experiments are represented in Figs. 17 and 18, while results for the PPGF sheet are represented in Figs. 19 and 20. An example of the results is given in Fig. 21.                    

> Figure 17: Model performance for PA66GF sheet experiments, across di ff erent instances t=kt f
> 10 k∈ { 0,2,4,6,8,10 }and z=H, using AE metric and using 4 thermal images as input to the encoder. The figure summarizes the mean, median and 90th percentile of AE of the model as given in Eq. 16.

The model prediction can give some insight about the sheet temperature during the stamping phase and thus could be used to predict regions where temperature is not suitable for the stamping process. In general, the model accuracy based on the real experiment data is good, especially outside the surface of contact for PA66GF sheet. The model was able to accurately encode the ICs pattern (thermal images) into its prediction. While it can be seen that the model was able to map the quality of contact and the mold position into its prediction, it was not able to accurately predict the temperature near the mold edges. This could be due to the inverse problem used to generate the QC, because the simulation results showed similar patterns compared to the experiment results and also due to the physics loss convergence, which needs further investigation to improve its convergence. Furthermore, the results for PPGF sheet are very good compared to PA66GF sheet results. One reason of this di ff erence could be due to the temperature range: while PPGF sheet has a range of 70 −140 ◦C, PA66GF sheet has a higher range of 100 −230 ◦C, which makes the prediction more challenging. 21 Figure 18: Model performance for PA66GF sheet experiments, across di ff erent instances t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 } and z = H, using APE 

metric and using 4 thermal images as input to the encoder. The figure summarizes the mean, median and 90th percentile of APE of the model as given in Eq. 15. 

Figure 19: Model performance for PPGF sheet experiments, across di ff erent instances t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 } and z = H, using AE metric and using 4 thermal images as input to the encoder. The figure summarizes the mean, median and 90th percentile of AE of the model as given in Eq. 16. 

Figure 20: Model performance for PPGF sheet experiments, across di ff erent instances t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 } and z = H, using APE metric and using 4 thermal images as input to the encoder. The figure summarizes the mean, median and 90th percentile of APE of the model as given in Eq. 15. 

22 Figure 21: Example of model results of top view surface temperature for PPGF sheet sample at z = H and t = kt f 

> 10

k ∈ { 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 } (columns). The first line represents the thermal images from experiment (ground truth), the second represents the model prediction, the third represents the Absolute Percentage Error (0-1) and the last line represents APE > 0.12 (binary values 0 or 1). 

23 5. Summary and Conclusion 

In this work, the PINN-SE model was tested on the heating and early cooling step of the thermo-stamping pro-cess of thermoplastic composite materials, validating the objectives set in this study. The extension of PINN-SE to sequences of 2D thermal images was validated using a combination of CNNs, which encode 2D images into vectors, followed by DeepSet to capture the temporal information within the sequence. The results show that the model can accurately encode 2D thermal image sequences alongside other information to predict temperatures in space and time. The extension to multi-encoder inputs was also demonstrated, incorporating di ff erent data sources such as 2D images, 2D image sequences, mold geometry and position and other process parameters. The application of PINN-SE to real data from the thermo-stamping process was demonstrated using an exper-imental setup that mimics the transfer of the sheet from the oven to the stamping phase, where a thermal camera captures the top surface temperature during natural convection. The model was trained solely on synthetic data gen-erated using FEM simulations, where parameters (ICs /BCs) are sampled from experimental results with the help of a CNN-based VAE model. Results are promising for both synthetic and experimental data, however accuracy dropped for experimental data, especially for PA66GF sheets, likely due to the inverse identification of thermal resistance and the assumption of isothermal TCR without accounting for pressure and gap between sheet and mold. Addressing these limitations by incorporating such parameters in both simulations and the PINN-SE would likely enhance its predic-tion. Additionally, the QC was used as input to the encoder, which is not easily obtainable in real cases a sequence to image model mapping thermocouple outputs to the QC image could address this limitation. Despite being trained on a limited dataset with high variability, the model generalized well. However, extending the dataset to more thicknesses and polymers will be necessary for general applicability. Finally, the convergence of the physical loss LPDE (Eq. 10) remains computationally expensive, using physics residual-based collocation point sampling [31] could reduce computational cost and accelerate convergence. 

Appendix A. VAE model architecture 

> Table A.3: CNN-VAE Architecture for ICs Configuration

Stage Layer Activation Encoder 

Input Input (161 , 161) –Conv2D + MaxPool 32 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 64 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 128 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Flatten – –Dense ×4 32 nodes each swish Dense 8 nodes ( zμ) linear Dense 8 nodes ( zσ) linear Sampling Sampling function z –

Decoder 

Dense + Reshape 20 ×20 ×128 swish UpSampling + Conv2D 128 filters swish UpSampling + Conv2D 64 filters swish UpSampling + Conv2D 32 filters swish Conv2D (final) 1 filter sigmoid Resize Resize (161,161) –24 Table A.4: CNN-VAE Architecture for QC Configuration 

Stage Layer Activation Encoder 

Input Input (91 , 59) –Conv2D + MaxPool 32 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 64 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 128 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Flatten – –Dense ×4 32 nodes each swish Dense 8 nodes ( zμ) linear Dense 8 nodes ( zσ) linear Sampling Sampling z –

Decoder 

Dense + Reshape 12 ×8×128 swish UpSampling + Conv2D 128 filters swish UpSampling + Conv2D 64 filters swish UpSampling + Conv2D 32 filters swish Conv2D (final) 1 filter sigmoid Resize Resize (91,59) –25 Appendix B. PINN-SE model architecture 

Encoder. The encoder architecture for the sequence of thermal images is given in Tab. B.5 for the CNN part and in Tab. B.6 for the Deep Sets. For QC the CNN architecture is given in Tab. B.7. For thickness and mold initial temperature, the used MLP architecture is given in Tab. B.8, while the polygon coordinates are encoded using an other MLP as described in Tab. B.9. These feature vectors are then concatenated and fed to an MLP with the architecture given in Tab. B.10. 

> Table B.5: CNN Encoder for ICs Configuration (PINN-SE).

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (161 , 161) –Conv2D + MaxPool 32 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 64 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 128 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Flatten – –Dense ×4 32 nodes each swish Dense 8 nodes ( zμ) –

> Table B.6: Deep Set Architecture.

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (sequence size, 9 features) –Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense (output) 32 nodes with L1 regularization layer –Aggregation Max pooling across time dimension –

> Table B.7: CNN Encoder for QC Configuration (PINN-SE).

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (91 , 59) –Conv2D + MaxPool 32 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 64 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Conv2D + MaxPool 128 filters, 3 ×3 same padding, pool (2,2) swish Flatten – –Dense ×4 64 nodes each swish Dense 32 nodes ( zμ) –

Space-time Encoder. The Random Fourier Features layer architecture used to encode the ( x, y) spatial data, along with the MLP used to encode the concatenation of the Fourier Features output and z, t is given in Tab. B.11. 

PINN. Two identical MLPs are used to represent the PINN architecture, as given in Tab. B.12. 26 Table B.8: Thickness and initial mold temperature MLP Architecture. 

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (2 features) –Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense (output) 32 nodes with L1 regularization layer –

> Table B.9: Polygon coordinates Model Architecture.

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (16 features) –Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense (output) 32 nodes with L1 regularization layer –

> Table B.10: Post feature encoding MLP Architecture.

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (104 features) –Dense 128 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 128 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense (output) 64 nodes with L1 regularization layer linear 

> Table B.11: Space-time Encoder Architecture with Fourier Features layer.

Stage Layer Activation 

Fourier Features Random Fourier Features, 30 nodes (scale = 0.1) –Concatenate – –Input Input (32 features) –Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization layer swish Dense (output) 32 nodes with L1 regularization layer –

> Table B.12: The PINN Architecture.

Stage Layer Activation 

Input Input (86 features) –Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization swish Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization swish Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization swish Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization swish Dense 100 nodes with L1 regularization swish Dense (output) 1 nodes with L1 regularization layer –27 Acknowledgements 

For the purpose of Open Access, a CC-BY public copyright licence has been applied by the authors to the present document and will be applied to all subsequent versions up to the Author Accepted Manuscript arising from this submission. 

Funding 

The authors would like acknowldge the funding and support of the PERFORM Program of IRT Jules Verne. 

References 

[1] M. Elaarabi, D. Borzacchiello, P. L. Bot, N. Lauzeral, S. Comas-Cardona, Hybrid adaptive modeling in process monitoring: Leveraging sequence encoders and physics-informed neural networks, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14252 (2025). [2] M. Elaarabi, D. Borzacchiello, P. Le Bot, Y. LE Guennec, S. Comas-Cardona, Adaptive parameters identification for nonlinear dynamics using deep permutation invariant networks, Machine Learning 114 (1) (2025) 1–36. [3] C. Ji, W. Sun, A review on data-driven process monitoring methods: Characterization and mining of industrial data, Processes 10 (2) (2022). doi:10.3390/pr10020335 .URL https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/10/2/335 

[4] M. Javaid, A. Haleem, R. P. Singh, S. Rab, R. Suman, Significance of sensors for industry 4.0: Roles, capabili-ties, and applications, Sensors International 2 (2021) 100110. [5] H. P. Breivold, Internet-of-things and cloud computing for smart industry: A systematic mapping study, in: 2017 5th International Conference on Enterprise Systems (ES), IEEE, 2017, pp. 299–304. [6] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, L. Yang, Physics-informed machine learning, Nature Reviews Physics 3 (6) (2021) 422–440. [7] Z. Hao, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Ying, Y. Feng, H. Su, J. Zhu, Physics-informed machine learning: A survey on problems, Methods and Applications (2023). [8] C. Schmidt, T. Hocke, B. Denkena, Deep learning-based classification of production defects in automated-fiber-placement processes, Production Engineering 13 (3) (2019) 501–509. [9] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, G. Monfardini, The graph neural network model, IEEE transactions on neural networks 20 (1) (2008) 61–80. [10] K. D. G. Maduranga, V. Zadorozhnyy, Q. Ye, Symmetry-structured convolutional neural networks, Neural Com-puting and Applications 35 (6) (2023) 4421–4434. [11] R. T. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, D. K. Duvenaud, Neural ordinary di ff erential equations, Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [12] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, G. E. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial di ff erential equations, Journal of Computa-tional physics 378 (2019) 686–707. [13] S. Cai, Z. Wang, F. Fuest, Y. J. Jeon, C. Gray, G. E. Karniadakis, Flow over an espresso cup: inferring 3-d velocity and pressure fields from tomographic background oriented schlieren via physics-informed neural networks, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 915 (2021) A102. 28 [14] J. M. Hanna, J. V. Aguado, S. Comas-Cardona, Y. Le Guennec, D. Borzacchiello, A self-supervised learning framework based on physics-informed and convolutional neural networks to identify local anisotropic perme-ability tensor from textiles 2d images for filling pattern prediction (2024). [15] S. A. Niaki, E. Haghighat, T. Campbell, A. Poursartip, R. Vaziri, Physics-informed neural network for mod-elling the thermochemical curing process of composite-tool systems during manufacture, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 384 (2021) 113959. [16] L. Qiu, Y. Wang, T. He, Y. Gu, F. Wang, Adaptive physics-informed neural networks for dynamic thermo-mechanical coupling problems in large-size-ratio functionally graded materials, arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07982 (2023). [17] H. Chen, S. Li, J. Wang, A. Ding, A focused review on the thermo-stamping process and simulation progresses of continuous fibre reinforced thermoplastic composites, Composites Part B: Engineering 224 (2021) 109196. 

doi:10.1016/j.compositesb.2021.109196 .[18] R. A. Brooks, H. Wang, Z. Ding, J. Xu, Q. Song, H. Liu, J. P. Dear, N. Li, A review on stamp forming of continuous fibre-reinforced thermoplastics, International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (3) (2022) 411–430. [19] Y. Gong, Z. Song, H. Ning, N. Hu, X. Peng, X. Wu, R. Zou, F. Liu, S. Weng, Q. Liu, A comprehensive review of characterization and simulation methods for thermo-stamping of 2d woven fabric reinforced thermoplastics, Composites Part B: Engineering 203 (2020) 108462. [20] A. BERTHEREAU, E. DALLIES, Fibres de verre de renforcement, Techniques de l’ingénieur. Matériaux fonc-tionnels 2 (AM5132) (2008). [21] J. E. Mark, J. E. Mark, Physical properties of polymers handbook, Vol. 1076, Springer, 2007. [22] M. Biron, Propriétés des thermoplastiques, Ed. Techniques Ingénieur, 1998. [23] SOPARA, Sopara présentation — spécialiste du rayonnement thermique, PDF presentation, last accessed March 30, 2026(2023). URL https://prokcssmedia.blob.core.windows.net/sys-master-images/h94/hd4/ 9474587361310/SOPARA%20Presentation%20FR%20NEW%20PP.pdf 

[24] D. Delaunay, P. Le Bot, R. Fulchiron, J.-F. Luye, G. Regnier, Nature of contact between polymer and mold in injection molding. part i: Influence of a non-perfect thermal contact, Polymer Engineering & Science 40 (7) (2000) 1682–1691. [25] J. Gibbins, Thermal contact resistance of polymer interfaces, University of Waterloo Waterloo, Ontario, 2006. [26] D. P. Kingma, M. Welling, Auto-encoding variational bayes, arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 (2013). [27] X. Hou, L. Shen, K. Sun, G. Qiu, Deep feature consistent variational autoencoder, in: 2017 IEEE winter confer-ence on applications of computer vision (WACV), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1133–1141. [28] M. Tancik, P. P. Srinivasan, B. Mildenhall, S. Fridovich-Keil, N. Raghavan, U. Singhal, R. Ramamoorthi, J. T. Barron, R. Ng, Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains (2020). 

arXiv:2006.10739 .URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10739 

[29] W. Chai, J. Chen, J. Wang, S. Velipasalar, A. Venkatachalapathy, Y. Adu-Gyamfi, J. Merickel, A. Sharma, Driver head pose detection from naturalistic driving data, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24 (9) (2023) 9368–9377. [30] H. Hewamalage, K. Ackermann, C. Bergmeir, Forecast evaluation for data scientists: common pitfalls and best practices, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 37 (2) (2023) 788–832. 29 [31] J. M. Hanna, J. V. Aguado, S. Comas-Cardona, R. Askri, D. Borzacchiello, Residual-based adaptivity for two-phase flow simulation in porous media using physics-informed neural networks, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 396 (2022) 115100. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.115100 .URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S004578252200295X 

30