Title: Scaling Scientific Discovery Environments for Turn-Level Agentic RL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28990v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 00:23:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Scaling Scientific Discovery Environments for Turn-Level Agentic RL 

Yucheng Xu †, Keyi Zhang †, Yuyang Yu, Min Zhang, Shiyuan Meng , Pei Chu , Zhongying Tu *

Shanghai AI Lab  

> †Equal contribution *Corresponding author

Abstract 

Large language model agents have shown promising capabilities in data-driven scientific discovery tasks, where an agent interacts with an execution environment and produces a sta-tistical claim. Long-horizon scientific analy-sis remains constrained by the lack of process-supervised environments over real-world sci-entific data. This paper introduces SciDisco ,a scalable framework for training Sci entific 

Disco very agents in process-verifiable envi-ronments. SciThèque compiles hypotheses, datasets, hidden evidence graphs, and veri-fiers into task environments where analyti-cal progress can be checked during interac-tion. DAG-grounded trajectory synthesis uses these environments to construct verifier-filtered multi-turn demonstrations. DiscoPO then uses the environment as the source of training sig-nal, assigning turn-level credit to actions that produce verifiable analytical evidence. Exper-iments show that SciDisco-14B reaches state-of-the-art on hypothesis-driven scientific data analysis benchmarks. 

1 Introduction 

Data-driven scientific discovery is a hypothesis-driven mode of empirical research over existing scientific datasets. In human practice, it requires researchers to understand scientific context and dataset structure, select appropriate methods, exe-cute statistical analyses, and draw verifiable con-clusions. Existing LLMs and LLM-based agents remain unreliable in this setting. Prior work shows that models struggle with statistical method applica-bility and data-based causal reasoning (Zhu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a). Agentic code and rea-soning scaffolds also achieve limited performance on data-driven discovery benchmarks (Majumder et al., 2025; Gu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025). These results suggest that data-driven scientific dis-covery should not be treated as one-shot question answering or single-turn code generation, but as an interactive process of executing, observing, revis-ing, and verifying analyses over real data. The core challenge is to train agents that learn ro-bust interaction policies, rather than merely encode scientific knowledge or generate code. Prompts and hand-written scaffolds can describe the steps of an analysis workflow, but benchmark evidence suggests that prompting and generic multi-turn training do not reliably produce goal-directed inter-action. In contrast, reward-trained tool use can outperform supervised tool traces in unfamiliar tool settings (Abdulhai et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025b). Data-driven discov-ery agents must therefore learn from environmen-tal feedback about when to inspect data, choose methods, test assumptions, revise analyses, and submit conclusions. This motivates training spe-cialized discovery agents inside scientific data en-vironments, rather than relying only on foundation models or inference-time workflow orchestration. Such training requires environments that are both executable and verifiable. A discovery RL en-vironment should provide data-driven goals, state-ful code execution, observations, and automatic ver-ification. Open scientific datasets are abundant, but they usually remain static files or metadata without task goals or verifiers. Existing scientific-discovery benchmarks provide valuable evaluation tasks and ground-truth criteria, but they do not expose hidden scientific evidence states for large-scale process-supervised training with persistent cross-turn state and verifier-grounded turn credit (Majumder et al., 2025; Gu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025). General agent and ML engineering environments support executable feedback and, in some cases, training, but their objectives target web interaction or ML engineering rather than real-data hypothesis verifi-cation (Liu et al., 2024b; Chan et al., 2024; Qiang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2026). Executable environments alone are still not enough for effective RL. Without a behavioral prior, arXiv:2607.28990v1 [cs.AI] 31 Jul 2026 early rollouts can be dominated by invalid tool calls, variable misreadings, and incomplete analy-ses. Data-driven scientific discovery also poses a long-horizon credit-assignment problem: final con-clusions depend on schema understanding, method selection, code execution, diagnostics, and evi-dence interpretation, while outcome-only rewards cannot identify which turns produced valid analyti-cal evidence (Wang et al., 2025b; Wei et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026b; Xie et al., 2026). These limitations point to a gap in agent training: data-driven scientific discovery needs an interface in which analytical progress can be executed, ver-ified, and credited during interaction. SciDisco 

provides such a framework for data-driven sci-entific discovery agents. Its environment layer, 

SciThèque , compiles open scientific datasets into verifiable hypothesis-driven environments. Hidden evidence DAGs support verified multi-turn demon-strations for SFT and provide process feedback that 

DiscoPO uses for turn-level credit assignment in agentic RL. SciDisco therefore aligns task construc-tion, behavior imitation, and policy optimization within realistic scientific data environments. The paper makes three contributions: 1. SciThèque builds scalable discovery environ-ments from open scientific datasets with hy-potheses, sandboxed execution, and verifiers. 2. DAG-grounded trajectory synthesis cold-starts agent behavior using verified multi-turn demonstrations. 3. DiscoPO assigns turn-level credit to verified evidence-producing processes instead of only final answers. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Discovery Agents and Environments 

Prior work on data-science and scientific-discovery agents follows two broad paradigms. The first im-proves data-specific capabilities, including tabular understanding, database operations, statistical rea-soning, and quantitative reasoning over data (Zhu et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024a). The second moves beyond single-turn QA by building agentic work-flows with ReAct-style interaction, code inter-preters, multi-agent scaffolds, or learned analysis trajectories. These systems often rely on strong closed-source models, leaving the underlying train-ing environment difficult to reuse (Guo et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2025b; Qiao et al., 2025). This makes it difficult to separate model capability from the executable interaction and verification substrate used to produce scientific conclusions. Discovery benchmarks evaluate agents on real data, open-ended questions, code execution, and conclusion checking (Majumder et al., 2025; Gu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025; Egg et al., 2025). In-teractive science environments support exploration in text-based or virtual worlds (Wang et al., 2022; O’Sullivan et al., 2024). General agent and MLE environments cover tool use, web interaction, exe-cutable feedback, and training efficiency (Liu et al., 2024b; Zhou et al., 2024; Chan et al., 2024; Qiang et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2026). These settings are valuable, but they are not built around real-data hypothesis verification with persistent execu-tion state and verifier-grounded process feedback. SciThèque constructs executable, verifiable discov-ery environments that connect data, hypotheses, code execution, and reusable multi-turn feedback, so the same environment can define tasks, filter trajectories, and provide RL signals. This shifts the role of an environment from a static evaluation artifact to a reusable training interface for scientific agent learning. 

2.2 Reinforcement Learning for LLM Agents 

Beyond prompting and SFT, recent work trains LLM agents with reinforcement learning. GRPO-style RLVR uses group-relative advantages to avoid explicit critics and train models on verifiable rea-soning or coding tasks (Shao et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025a). Later variants improve sampling, clipping, normalization, length bias, and self-distillation routing (Yu et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026a). These methods provide a strong optimiza-tion backbone for agent training, but their rewards usually remain at the response or trajectory level. For multi-turn agents, recent work assigns credit at step, turn, or segment granularity, or calibrates intermediate decisions with hindsight, reflection, or trajectory correction (Feng et al., 2025; Wei et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026b; Zong et al., 2026; Guo et al., 2025b; Lu et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025a,c). These methods recognize that final rewards cannot iden-tify which intermediate actions advanced the task. However, their signals often depend on repeated states, tree search, segmenters, hindsight models, reflection, or task-specific step rewards, rather than evidence produced by executed scientific analyses. DiscoPO instead uses scientific verifiers to credit turns that produce validated analytical evidence, aligning turn-level RL with hypothesis verification. 

3 Problem Formulation 

A scientific discovery task is formulated as a hypothesis-driven data analysis problem. Given a dataset, the task is to evaluate a scientific hypoth-esis, produce statistical findings, and support those findings with executable analysis. Let U = {uj }Nj=1 denote a collection of such tasks. Each task is represented as: 

uj = ( hj , d j , v j ), (1) where hj specifies the hypothesis or analysis goal, 

dj is the dataset associated with the task, and vj

denotes the task verifier. Each task uj is paired with an environment ej ,and the corresponding environment collection is 

E = {ej }Nj=1 . The environment exposes hj and 

dj , executes the agent’s actions in a sandbox, and returns observations, while task-internal verifica-tion state may remain hidden. The interaction be-tween policy πθ and environment ej can therefore be modeled as a partially observable Markov de-cision process (POMDP), producing a trajectory 

τj :

τj = ( oj, 0, a j, 1, o j, 1, . . . , a j,T j , o j,T j ), (2) where oj, 0 contains the initial task observation, ac-tions aj,t can be executable analysis or terminal submission, and observations oj,t contain environ-ment feedback. A final reward provides only sparse credit assign-ment for a scientific discovery trajectory. It cannot distinguish an evidence-building trajectory from a one-shot shortcut that happens to produce the same submitted findings. Let rj,t denote the process reward assigned to turn t, measuring whether that turn contributes ver-ifiable progress toward the task findings. The train-ing goal is to maximize the accumulated process reward: 

Rj (τj ) = 

> Tj

X

> t=1

rj,t , (3) and the optimization objective is: 

J(θ) = E [ Rj (τj )] , (4) where the expectation is over tasks sampled from 

U and trajectories generated by πθ in their paired environments. 

4 Methodology 

SciDisco turns the process-reward formulation in Section 3 into a three-stage post-training pipeline for scientific discovery agents. SciThèque com-piles scientific datasets into sandboxed task envi-ronments with task-local hidden evidence DAGs. DAG-grounded trajectory synthesis uses these en-vironments to produce verifiable multi-turn demon-strations for SFT cold-start. DiscoPO then op-timizes the policy with turn-level credit from environment-verified scientific progress. The task-local hidden evidence DAG is the shared interface across these stages: it defines what can be synthe-sized, what counts as an accepted transition during online interaction, and how progress is credited during RL. 

4.1 SciThèque 

SciThèque instantiates the environment collection 

E defined in Section 3. It constructs tasks uj =(hj , d j , v j ) from source datasets and hypothesis templates, then mounts each task in a sandbox run-time to form an environment ej . The agent sees 

hj , data files dj , and observations oj,t , while the verifier logic, evidence DAG, and progress state re-main hidden. Appendix A reports the data-source distribution and materialized environment contract. 

Catalog construction. SciThèque first builds can-didate dataset entries ci = ( si, d i, m i, ρ i), where 

si is the source, di the dataset, mi the modality, and ρi a structural profile recording provenance, licence metadata, file structure, size, and analysis-relevant fields. Inexpensive gates remove unsuit-able datasets before task creation, and each sur-viving dataset is classified as tabular, temporal, graph, spatial, or sequence data. Appendix A re-ports source citations and snapshot counts. 

Template-guided hypothesis generation. For each modality m, SciThèque maintains a template library Tm indexed by statistical pattern and out-come type. Each catalog entry is matched to tem-plates allowed by ρi, and an external LLM proposes constrained specifications Hi = {(Ti,k , η i,k )}Ki

> k=1

,where Ti,k ∈ T mi is an applicable template and ηi,k 

instantiates it on di. The LLM proposes candidates but does not certify validity; retained specifications from all Hi form the materialization pool. 

Environment materialization. Materialization turns each retained specification into a training en-vironment. SciThèque runs the reference analy-sis on di under the selected template and accepts Figure 1: The pipeline of SciDisco : 1) SciThèque builds a scalable collection of data–hypothesis–verifier environ-ments from scientific datasets; 2) Trajectory Synthesis traverses the evidence DAG through executable analysis primitives and keeps accepted state transitions as multi-turn SFT demonstrations; 3) DiscoPO defines turn-level rewards by increases in verified DAG progress, assigning credit to evidence-producing turns. 

the specification only if the analysis executes and yields verifier-backed findings. The accepted speci-fication becomes uj = ( hj , d j , v j ), then is paired with sandbox runtime Sj to form ej = ( uj , Sj ).The verifier vj is grounded in a hidden evidence DAG: 

gj = ( Vj , Aj ), (5) Each node in Vj defines a verifiable scientific state transition and is typed by a process primitive, such as data inspection, model fitting, diagnostic check-ing, or robustness analysis. The primitive type determines the admissible family of analysis opera-tions for that node, so a turn is verified against the scientific role of the transition rather than arbitrary code execution. The directed edges Aj encode prerequisite relations, so only frontier nodes are eligible at a given turn. The DAG is hidden from the agent and defines the progress state used by vj

to verify intermediate work. Appendix B details the visibility split, evidence-graph record, progress rule, and leakage controls. To assess whether the verifier design matches domain-level scientific practice, 10 domain experts covering the scientific domains represented in the environment corpus manually reviewed the evi-dence primitives, prerequisite structure, and accep-tance criteria used by the hidden evidence graphs. Appendix B reports the review protocol and audit scope. The materialized output is therefore an environ-ment specification, not a static question-answer pair. Each task stores its data files, instructions, verifier, task-local evidence DAG, final checker, and reproducibility metadata. 

4.2 DAG-Grounded Trajectory Synthesis 

DAG-grounded trajectory synthesis uses SciThèque environments to construct SFT demonstrations for model cold-start. Although the evidence DAG defines verifiable scientific state transitions, a base policy may not know how to realize them as executable analysis turns. SFT therefore places the policy in the right interaction regime before RL begins. Appendix C reports the synthesis stages, filtering criteria, and retained corpus snapshot. For each materialized task uj with hidden ev-idence DAG gj , the synthesizer constructs a pri-vate transition schedule σj,ℓ over the required DAG nodes. This schedule specifies the verified tran-sition executed at each step while respecting the prerequisite structure of gj . For each scheduled node, the synthesizer selects an executable pro-gram variant consistent with the node’s process primitive. The schedule and program choices re-main hidden. The transcript exposes only assis-tant reasoning <thought> , code actions <python> ,sandbox observations <obs> , and a final <submit> 

action. Each synthesized trajectory uses a fresh sandbox runtime, where the scheduled <python> actions are executed. After each execution, the verifier 

vj checks whether the visible observation estab-lishes the scheduled transition in gj . A trajectory is rejected if the code fails, produces no verifiable evidence, matches the wrong frontier node, violates the primitive process constraint, or accesses hidden verifier files. Each retained SFT turn therefore cor-responds to an accepted scientific state transition rather than an arbitrary code fragment. After all scheduled transitions are accepted, syn-thesis closes the transcript with a <submit> ac-tion. The submission records findings already es-tablished through verified transitions rather than introducing a separate terminal reward. Let Tsyn 

be the pool of candidate trajectories produced by synthesis, and let τj,ℓ denote the ℓ-th candidate tra-jectory for task uj . A candidate is retained in DSFT 

only when the required nodes in gj have been com-pleted and the submitted findings are consistent with the accumulated verifier state: 

DSFT = {τj,ℓ ∈ T syn | Aj (τj,ℓ , g j ) = 1 }. (6) Here Aj (τj,ℓ , g j ) = 1 indicates that the trajectory completes the required DAG transitions in a valid order and submits the findings verified during those transitions. For the same task, synthesis can retain several verifier-valid trajectories rather than a single canon-ical solution path. These trajectories may differ in transition schedule, executable program variant, finding-reporting order, and reasoning style, while sharing the same hidden DAG and verifier con-straints. Training-data conversion removes sched-uler labels, hidden node identifiers, reference val-ues, verifier tolerances, and generator-only helper variables. This cold-start stage teaches the pol-icy to reason through a scientific state-transition chain. DiscoPO can then optimize verified scien-tific progress from a policy that already follows the basic scientific behavior. 

4.3 DiscoPO 

DiscoPO trains the policy in SciThèque environ-ments. At each turn within a trajectory, the agent emits either a <python> cell or a <submit> ac-tion. The sandbox presents each task as an agent workspace, and its persistent kernel lets later turns reuse earlier variables, models, and files. Each ob-servation provides evidence for verifying the next state transition. GRPO computes a group-normalized advantage from trajectory-level rewards and broadcasts that advantage to all generated tokens of the trajec-tory (Shao et al., 2024). DiscoPO keeps the same group-relative normalization but computes the ad-vantage from verifier-gated progress at each inter-action turn. 

Algorithm 1 DiscoPO                                                                     

> Require: task environments {ej}, hidden DAGs {gj}, old policy πold , group size G, clip parameters ϵlow ,ϵhigh
> 1: for each training iteration do
> 2: sample a batch of task environments 3: for each sampled environment ejdo
> 4: sample Grollouts {τj,k }Gk=1 with πold
> 5: for each rollout k= 1 , . . . , G do
> 6: initialize Cj,k, 0← ∅
> 7: for each turn tin τj,k do
> 8: use vjto update Cj,k,t +1 from Cj,k,t
> 9: compute rj,k,t by Eq. 8 10: end for
> 11: end for
> 12: compute bj,t and Aj,k,t by Eqs. 11 and 12 13: assign Aj,k,t to generated tokens in turn tand mask observations 14: end for
> 15: update πθwith the clipped surrogate over turn-level advantages 16: set πold ←πθ
> 17: end for

Verifier-gated state transitions. For task uj , let 

gj = ( Vj , Aj ) be the hidden evidence DAG, and let Vexec  

> j

⊆ V j denote the required DAG nodes ver-ified through <python> turns. For rollout k of task 

j, Cj,k,t records the DAG nodes credited before turn t. Here j follows Section 4.1 and indexes the materialized task, while k indexes one trajectory in the rollout group used for group-relative advantage. Appendix F shows an example rollout trajectory. At each turn, the verifier vj considers only fron-tier nodes, meaning uncredited nodes whose pre-requisites have already been completed. The veri-fier then checks whether the current <python> turn matches the process primitive assigned to one fron-tier node. A turn is accepted only when the ob-servation provides evidence for exactly one such node and the executed code satisfies its node-local process check. Turns are rejected when they provide no observ-able evidence, match no frontier node, match mul-tiple frontier nodes, repeat completed work, or col-lapse several analyses into one action. If a turn is accepted, the matched node is added to the hid-den completed-node state; otherwise, the state is left unchanged. The <submit> action is checked against the verifier and can be accepted only after the required nodes have been credited. Appendix G gives concrete rejection categories and their train-ing consequences. 

Credit assignment. For task uj , let Nj = |V exec  

> j

|

be the number of required executable primitive transitions, and let ssub  

> j

denote the terminal sub-mit node. The set of progress nodes is Pj =

Vexec  

> j

∪{ ssub  

> j

}. DiscoPO defines the DAG-progress potential over credited-node sets as: 

Φj (C) = |C ∩ P j ||P j | . (7) The per-turn process reward is the potential differ-ence: 

rj,k,t = Φ j (Cj,k,t +1 ) − Φj (Cj,k,t ). (8) When a <python> turn is accepted, it adds one previously uncredited primitive node. A valid 

<submit> action adds the terminal submit node once all required primitives have been completed. Turns that do not add a new progress node receive zero reward. Equivalently: 

rj,k,t =

( 1  

> Nj+1

, accepted primitive/submit, 

0, otherwise. (9) For each task environment, a group of G rollouts 

{τj,k }Gk=1 is sampled from the old policy πold . Let 

Tj,k be the length of rollout k. Rewards from ter-minated rollouts are zero-padded when computing the same-turn baseline: 

erj,k,t =

 rj,k,t , t ≤ Tj,k ,

0, t > T j,k . (10) This same-turn baseline compares whether rollouts for the same task make verifier progress at interac-tion index t; it does not require different rollouts to complete the same DAG node at that index. Dis-coPO then applies turn group normalization. The same-turn baseline is: 

bj,t = 1

G

> G

X

> k=1

erj,k,t . (11) The turn advantage is: 

Aj,k,t = erj,k,t − bj,t . (12) 

Policy optimization. The policy update assigns 

Aj,k,t to policy-generated tokens in turn t, masks observation tokens, and applies a PPO clipped sur-rogate at turn granularity (Schulman et al., 2017). Let Ij,k,t denote the generated-token positions in that turn, let ρi(θ) be the old-policy likelihood ra-tio for token i, and let ¯ρi(θ) be its clipped value. DiscoPO optimizes: 

LDiscoPO (θ) = −Ej,k,t 

 1

|I j,k,t |

X

> i∈I j,k,t

si(θ)

 ,si(θ) = min ( ρi(θ)Aj,k,t , ¯ρi(θ)Aj,k,t ) .

(13) The optimizer is standard; the change is that verifier-gated DAG progress supplies turn-level to-ken weights instead of a scalar trajectory reward. Groups whose turn advantages are identically zero are filtered before optimization because they pro-vide no group-relative policy-gradient signal. Ap-pendix E expands the token-level notation. 

5 Experiments 

The experiments evaluate whether SciDisco im-proves data-driven scientific discovery and exe-cutable scientific data analysis. The evaluation covers three benchmark regimes: hypothesis gen-eration over scientific datasets, multi-step business data analysis, and programmatically checked data-science workflows. 

5.1 Benchmarks DiscoveryBench. DiscoveryBench tests whether an agent can produce data-driven scientific hypothe-ses from a dataset and a discovery goal (Majumder et al., 2025). Table 1 reports the average Hypoth-esis Match Score (HMS), which aligns predicted and gold sub-hypotheses along context, variable, and relationship dimensions. GPT-5 Mini was used as the judge model during evaluation. 

DABStep. DABStep contains 450 realistic multi-step data-analysis tasks over business datasets, split into 72 easy and 378 hard cases (Egg et al., Model DiscoveryBench DABStep DataSciBench                                                                              

> Average HMS Easy Hard Average Success Rate Completion Rate
> Proprietary Models
> GPT-4o 13.2 66.7 6.1 15.8 66.3 68.4 GPT-5 Mini 26.9 68.1 15.3 23.8 45.9 63.4 Claude-Sonnet-4 23.2 81.9 19.8 29.7 67.6 76.6
> Open-source Models
> DeepSeek-V4-Flash 28.3 79.2 12.2 22.9 60.8 72.1
> Intern-S1-Pro 34.7 65.3 4.8 14.5 59.5 67.6 Qwen3-8B 11.3 47.2 3.2 10.2 31.5 48.4 Qwen3-14B 20.0 55.6 4.2 12.4 32.4 45.9 Qwen3-32B 24.1 59.7 4.5 13.3 36.0 52.4
> Related Methods
> DeepAnalyze-8B 25.9 70.8 32.8 38.9 46.8 57.3 AutoSDT-Coder-14B 7.3 56.9 2.7 11.3 1.0 1.3 DataMind-14B 25.5 68.1 3.2 13.6 20.3 24.8 SciDisco-14B 35.2 62.5 9.3 17.8 56.2 61.0

Table 1: Main results on DiscoveryBench, DABStep, and DataSciBench. Performance is reported as percentages. The best results for each model group are highlighted in bold. 

2025). Its tasks emphasise business data analy-sis, where an agent completes operational analyses over enterprise-like tables, reports, visualisations, or decision-support queries. Table 1 reports easy ac-curacy, hard accuracy, and the task-count-weighted average. 

DataSciBench. DataSciBench evaluates end-to-end data-science workflows with programmatic Task–Function–Code checks over data prepara-tion, analysis, modelling, visualisation, and insight tasks (Zhang et al., 2025a). Table 1 reports the benchmark-level success rate and completion rate, while Table 2 further uses the DataSciBench break-down to report fine-grained F1–F5 scores for data preparation, plot validity, data exploration, data visualization, and data modeling. 

5.2 Models and Baselines 

We organize baselines into three groups to sepa-rate general model capability from data-science-specific training. The proprietary group in-cludes GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024), GPT-5 Mini (Ope-nAI, 2025), and Claude Sonnet 4 (Anthropic, 2025), representing strong closed-source agen-tic models. The open-source group includes DeepSeek-V4-Flash (DeepSeek-AI, 2026), Intern-S1-Pro (Intern-S1-Pro Team, 2026), and Qwen3-8B/14B/32B (Yang et al., 2025), allowing compar-ison against publicly available general models at different scales. The related-method group includes DeepAnalyze-8B (Zhang et al., 2025b), AutoSDT-Coder-14B (Li et al., 2025), and DataMind-14B (Qiao et al., 2025), which are specialized for data analysis or scientific discovery. SciDisco-14B is trained from Qwen3-14B using the SciDisco tra-jectory corpus and DiscoPO objective. 

5.3 Experimental Setup 

Starting from Qwen3-14B, we first apply cold-start SFT on SciDisco-produced verified trajectories and then perform DiscoPO agentic RL. Training uses the Slime post-training framework (THUDM, 2025), with SGLang for rollout generation and in-ference (Zheng et al., 2024). For the RL stage, we use a rollout batch size of 16 and a group size of 8. The resulting SciDisco-14B checkpoint is evaluated on the three benchmarks above. All train-ing and inference are conducted on NVIDIA A100 GPUs; detailed hyperparameters, source licenses, and corpus distribution are reported in Appendix A and Appendix D. 

5.4 Main Results 

Table 1 compares proprietary, open-source, and specialised data-science agents across three scien-tific data-analysis benchmarks. SciDisco-14B ob-tains the strongest DiscoveryBench result among all listed models, reaching 35.2% average HMS. This score exceeds the strongest proprietary base-line, GPT-5 Mini at 26.9%, the strongest open-source baseline, Intern-S1-Pro at 34.7%, and the strongest related-method baseline, DeepAnalyze-8B at 25.9%. SciDisco-14B also performs strongly on DataS-ciBench. It reaches 56.2% Success Rate and 61.0% Completion Rate, outperforming the related-method baselines on both metrics. The result re-mains below the strongest proprietary and open-Setting Coarse-grained Metrics Fine-grained Metrics Success Rate Completion Rate VLM F1: Data Preparation F2: Plot Validity F3: Data Exploration F4: Data Visualization F5: Data Modeling                                 

> Qwen3-14B 32.4 45.9 /16.1 41.1 29.3 23.6 22.3 + SFT 46.8 53.3 /37.9 51.8 32.8 50.9 23.4 + SFT + GRPO 49.5 55.4 /39.8 53.6 34.5 52.7 26.3 + SFT + DiscoPO 56.3 61.0 /43.0 57.1 41.4 56.4 31.6
> Table 2: Ablation study on SciDisco training objectives. Performance is evaluated on DataSciBench. Success Rate reports pass rate, Completion Rate reports completion accuracy, and F1–F5 measure fine-grained performance across data-science sub-tasks. VLM was left empty because the backbone model lacks vision capability.

source models on DataSciBench, but closes much of the gap while using a 14B open-weight back-bone. DABStep shows a different pattern. SciDisco-14B reaches 17.8% average accuracy, below DeepAnalyze-8B at 38.9%, Claude-Sonnet-4 at 29.7%, and GPT-5 Mini at 23.8%. The hard split remains challenging for all Qwen3-family models, with Qwen3-8B, Qwen3-14B, and Qwen3-32B all below 5%. SciDisco improves over the Qwen3-14B backbone on DABStep, but does not match methods specialised for this benchmark regime. 

5.5 Ablation Studies 

Table 2 isolates the effect of the training objective on the 14B backbone using DataSciBench. SFT provides the main first-stage gain over Qwen3-14B, and adding GRPO gives a further but smaller im-provement. The full SFT + DiscoPO setting obtains the strongest coarse-grained result, reaching 56.3% Success Rate and 61.0% Completion Rate. The fine-grained metrics follow the same order-ing. SFT + DiscoPO obtains the highest score on every reported sub-task, with the largest incremen-tal gains over SFT + GRPO appearing in Data Mod-eling and Data Exploration. These two categories are the clearest ablation signal for the turn-level ob-jective, while the detailed mechanism is analysed in Section 5.6. 

5.6 Analysis 

The results support a specific reading of SciDisco’s contribution. DiscoveryBench is closest to the pa-per’s data-driven scientific discovery setting be-cause it evaluates hypothesis construction over scientific datasets. SciDisco-14B’s leading HMS score indicates that training on process-verifiable scientific environments improves the model’s abil-ity to form benchmark-matched scientific hypothe-ses from data. DataSciBench provides a complementary exe-cutable analysis test. The gains over related meth-ods and the ablation improvements in Table 2 indi-cate that SciDisco also improves code-mediated data analysis under programmatic checks. The strongest ablation gains appear in Data Exploration and Data Modeling, the two categories most di-rectly tied to intermediate analytical decisions. DABStep exposes the boundary of the current training distribution. Its business data-analysis tasks often require completing operational analyses, reports, visualisations, or decision-support queries over enterprise-like tables. SciDisco instead trains on hypothesis-driven scientific environments where progress is defined by verifier-grounded evidence for statistical claims. The weaker DABStep re-sult therefore suggests that the current environment distribution transfers better to scientific hypothesis analysis and executable scientific data analysis than to all forms of multi-step business analytics. The ablation results locate where the training sig-nal enters. SFT gives the largest first-stage gain by exposing the model to verifier-filtered executable trajectories. GRPO adds a smaller improvement over SFT, indicating that trajectory-level outcome optimisation supplies useful reinforcement. SFT + DiscoPO gives the strongest result because the reward is assigned to turns that complete hidden evidence-state transitions, rather than only to tra-jectories that end with a correct answer. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented SciDisco, a framework for training data-driven scientific discovery agents in process-verifiable environments. Hidden evidence DAGs and verifier checks make intermediate analytical progress trainable, while SciTh‘eque compiles sci-entific datasets and hypothesis templates into sand-boxed environments shared by DAG-grounded syn-thesis and DiscoPO. Evaluation results support SciDisco as a scalable pipeline for converting veri-fied analytical evidence into process supervision. Limitations 

SciDisco focuses on executable data-analysis work-flows over text-readable scientific data, rather than wet-lab discovery, multimodal scientific artifacts, or open-ended hypothesis generation beyond the template space. The coverage of the environment distribution is also limited by the available source adapters, modality handlers, and hypothesis tem-plates. Finally, environment-accepted progress is still a proxy for scientific quality: it verifies whether an analysis step was valid for the task con-tract, but it does not by itself establish that the agent made a novel scientific discovery. 

References 

Marwa Abdulhai, Isadora White, Charlie Snell, Charles Sun, Joey Hong, Yuexiang Zhai, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. 2023. LMRL gym: Benchmarks for multi-turn reinforcement learning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18232 .Anthropic. 2025. Introducing Claude 4. Anthropic News. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2026a. Flu-View interactive. Public health data service. Ac-cessed 25 May 2026. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2026b. PLACES: Local data for better health. Public health data service. Accessed 25 May 2026. Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Lil-ian Weng, and Aleksander Madry. 2024. MLE-bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07095 .Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Botao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2025. ScienceAgentBench: Toward rigorous as-sessment of language agents for data-driven scientific discovery. In International Conference on Learning Representations .DeepSeek-AI. 2026. DeepSeek-V4-Flash. Hugging Face Model Card. Alex Egg, Martin Iglesias Goyanes, Friso Kingma, An-dreu Mora, Leandro von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2025. DABstep: Data agent benchmark for multi-step reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23719 .Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 2026. FRED, federal reserve economic data. Data service. Accessed 25 May 2026. Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. 2025. Group-in-group policy optimization for LLM agent training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10978 .Rakshitha Godahewa, Christoph Bergmeir, Geoffrey I. Webb, Rob J. Hyndman, and Pablo Montero-Manso. 2021. Monash time series forecasting archive. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Ken Gu, Ruoxi Shang, Ruien Jiang, Keying Kuang, Richard-John Lin, Donghe Lyu, Yue Mao, Youran Pan, Teng Wu, Jiaqian Yu, Yikun Zhang, Tianmai M. Zhang, Lanyi Zhu, Mike A. Merrill, Jeffrey Heer, and Tim Althoff. 2024. BLADE: Benchmarking language model agents for data-driven science. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025a. DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in LLMs via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Siyuan Guo, Cheng Deng, Ying Wen, Hechang Chen, Yi Chang, and Jun Wang. 2024. DS-Agent: Auto-mated data science by empowering large language models with case-based reasoning. In International Conference on Machine Learning .Yiran Guo, Lijie Xu, Jie Liu, Dan Ye, and Shuang Qiu. 2025b. Segment policy optimization: Effec-tive segment-level credit assignment in RL for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23564 .Sirui Hong, Yizhang Lin, Bang Liu, Bangbang Liu, Binhao Wu, Ceyao Zhang, Chenxing Wei, Danyang Li, Jiaqi Chen, Jiayi Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Li Zhang, Lingyao Zhang, Min Yang, Mingchen Zhuge, Taicheng Guo, Tuo Zhou, Wei Tao, Xiangru Tang, and 8 others. 2024. Data interpreter: An LLM agent for data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18679 .Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta, and Jure Leskovec. 2020. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. In Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems .Intern-S1-Pro Team. 2026. Intern-S1-Pro: Scientific multimodal foundation model at trillion scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25040 .Markelle Kelly, Rachel Longjohn, and Kolby Notting-ham. 2023. The UCI machine learning repository. Data repository. Gengsheng Li, Tianyu Yang, Junfeng Fang, Mingyang Song, Mao Zheng, Haiyun Guo, Dan Zhang, Jinqiao Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2026a. Unifying group-relative and self-distillation policy optimization via sample routing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02288 .Peiji Li, Linyang Li, Handa Sun, Wenjin Mai, Yongkang Chen, Xiaozhe Li, Yue Shen, Yichuan Ma, Yiliu Sun, Jiaxi Cao, Zhishu He, Bo Wang, Xiaoqing Zheng, Zhaori Bi, Xipeng Qiu, Qipeng Guo, Kai Chen, and Dahua Lin. 2026b. TL-GRPO: Turn-level RL for reasoning-guided iterative optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16480 .Yifei Li, Hanane Nour Moussa, Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Botao Yu, Mingyi Xue, Benjamin Burns, Tzu-Yao Chiu, Vishal Dey, Zitong Lu, Chen Wei, Qianheng Zhang, Tianyu Zhang, Song Gao, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Nesreen K. Ahmed, Ali Payani, and Huan Sun. 2025. AutoSDT: Scaling data-driven discovery tasks toward open co-scientists. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 30396–30418. Ziming Li, Qianbo Zang, David Ma, Jiawei Guo, Tuney Zheng, Minghao Liu, Xinyao Niu, Yue Wang, Jian Yang, Jiaheng Liu, Wanjun Zhong, Wangchun-shu Zhou, Wenhao Huang, and Ge Zhang. 2024. AutoKaggle: A multi-agent framework for au-tonomous data science competitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20424 .Xiao Liu, Zirui Wu, Xueqing Wu, Pan Lu, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yansong Feng. 2024a. Are LLMs ca-pable of data-based statistical and causal reasoning? benchmarking advanced quantitative reasoning with data. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 9215–9235. Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, and 1 others. 2024b. Agent-Bench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Zichen Liu, Chang Liu, Xueqing Liu, Daya Guo, Jun Chen, and Chunting Zhou. 2025. Understanding R1-Zero-like training: A critical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20783 .Zhicong Lu, Zichuan Lin, Wei Jia, Changyuan Tian, Deheng Ye, Peiguang Li, Li Jin, Nayu Liu, Guan-gluan Xu, and Wei Feng. 2026. HISR: Hindsight information modulated segmental process rewards for multi-turn agentic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18683 .Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Harshit Surana, Dhruv Agarwal, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Abhijeetsingh Meena, Aryan Prakhar, Tirth Vora, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. 2025. Discov-eryBench: Towards data-driven discovery with large language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4o system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276 .OpenAI. 2025. Introducing GPT-5 for developers. Ope-nAI Blog. John O’Sullivan, Alan Lindsay, Brian Magerko, An-tonio Lieto, and Ashok K. Goel. 2024. Discov-eryWorld: A virtual environment for developing and evaluating automated scientific discovery agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06769 .Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tur, Gokhan Tur, and Heng Ji. 2025. ToolRL: Reward is all tool learning needs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13958 .Rushi Qiang, Yuchen Zhuang, Yinghao Li, V K Dingu Sagar, Rongzhi Zhang, Changhao Li, Ian Shu-Hei Wong, Sherry Yang, Percy Liang, Chao Zhang, and Bo Dai. 2025. MLE-Dojo: Interactive environ-ments for empowering LLM agents in machine learn-ing engineering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Shuofei Qiao, Yanqiu Zhao, Zhisong Qiu, Xiaobin Wang, Jintian Zhang, Zhao Bin, Ningyu Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. 2025. Scaling generalist data-analytic agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.25084 .John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Damian Szklarczyk, Rebecca Kirsch, Mikaela Koutrouli, Katerina Nastou, Farrokh Mehryary, Rayan Hachilif, Annika L. Gable, Tao Fang, Nadezhda T. Doncheva, Sampo Pyysalo, Peer Bork, Lars J. Jensen, and Christian von Mering. 2023. The STRING database in 2023: Protein-protein association networks and functional enrichment analyses for any sequenced genome of interest. 

Nucleic Acids Research , 51(D1):D638–D646. The UniProt Consortium. 2025. UniProt: The univer-sal protein knowledgebase in 2025. Nucleic Acids Research , 53(D1):D609–D617. THUDM. 2025. slime: An SGLang-native post-training framework for RL scaling. Software repository. U.S. Geological Survey. 2026. USGS water data for the nation. Earth-science data service. Accessed 25 May 2026. Joaquin Vanschoren, Jan N. van Rijn, Bernd Bischl, and Luis Torgo. 2013. OpenML: Networked science in machine learning. SIGKDD Explorations , 15(2):49– 60. Hanlin Wang, Jian Wang, Chak Tou Leong, and Wenjie Li. 2025a. STeCa: Step-level trajectory calibration for LLM agent learning. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 .Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Cote, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022. ScienceWorld: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07540 .Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing Jin, Ke-fan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Got-tlieb, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho, Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. 2025b. RAGEN: Understanding self-evolution in LLM agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20073 .Ziliang Wang, Xuhui Zheng, Kang An, Cijun Ouyang, Jialu Cai, Yuhang Wang, and Yichao Wu. 2025c. StepSearch: Igniting LLMs search ability via step-wise proximal policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15107 .Quan Wei, Siliang Zeng, Chenliang Li, William Brown, Oana Frunza, Wei Deng, Anderson Schneider, Yuriy Nevmyvaka, Yang Katie Zhao, Alfredo Garcia, and Mingyi Hong. 2025. Reinforcing multi-turn rea-soning in LLM agents via turn-level reward design. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11821 .Yutao Xie, Nathaniel Thomas, Nicklas Hansen, Yang Fu, Li Erran Li, and Xiaolong Wang. 2026. TIPS: Turn-level information-potential reward shaping for search-augmented LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22293 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Yelp Inc. 2026. Yelp open dataset. Open dataset. Ac-cessed 25 May 2026. Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, Xin Liu, and 1 others. 2025. DAPO: An open-source LLM reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14476 .Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Min Cai, Fengzu Li, Lekang Yang, Wei Wang, Tianjiao Dong, Ziniu Hu, Jie Tang, and Yisong Yue. 2025a. DataSciBench: An LLM agent benchmark for data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13897 .Shaolei Zhang, Ju Fan, Meihao Fan, Guoliang Li, and Xiaoyong Du. 2025b. DeepAnalyze: Agentic large language models for autonomous data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16872 .Wenqi Zhang, Yongliang Shen, Weiming Lu, and Yuet-ing Zhuang. 2023. Data-Copilot: Bridging billions of data and humans with autonomous workflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07209 .Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark W. Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. 2024. WebArena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Yuhang Zhou, Lizhu Zhang, Yifan Wu, Jiayi Liu, Xi-angjun Fan, Zhuokai Zhao, and Hong Yan. 2026. Synthetic sandbox for training machine learning en-gineering agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04872 .Yizhang Zhu, Shiyin Du, Boyan Li, Yuyu Luo, and Nan Tang. 2024. Are large language models good statisticians? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Zefang Zong, Dingwei Chen, Yang Li, Qi Yi, Bo Zhou, Chengming Li, Bo Qian, Peng Chen, and Jie Jiang. 2026. AT 2PO: Agentic turn-based pol-icy optimization via tree search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04767 .A Task Environment and Data Coverage 

SciThèque is a collection of self-contained scien-tific discovery environments. Each environment gives the agent a natural-language hypothesis, task data, and an interactive analysis session. The con-text shown to the agent contains only the task de-scription and data. The hidden materials used for verification are kept outside the policy context and are used only by the environment to judge progress and final correctness. 

Environment snapshot. This environment snap-shot contains 1,686 materialised environments across five modalities. Table 3 reports the modality distribution. The corpus is not limited to standard tabular prediction: it also includes time-series, spa-tial, sequence, and graph settings so that the trained agent must reuse the same scientific-interaction protocol across heterogeneous data forms.               

> Modality Environments Share
> Tabular 1,024 60.7% Time series 287 17.0% Spatial 206 12.2% Sequence 114 6.8% Graph 55 3.3% Total 1,686 100.0%

Table 3: Materialized Environment Distribution by Modality 

Outcome and domain distribution. The corpus spans continuous, binary, count, multiclass, and other structured outcome types. Table 4 reports the outcome-kind distribution, with ordinal, modality-specific, and survival outcomes grouped as other structured outcomes. Table 5 reports the domain distribution, led by economics, medicine, biology, and earth science. The aggregate other-domain category contains additional scientific areas with distinct analysis conventions.               

> Outcome kind Environments Share
> Continuous 716 42.5% Binary 511 30.3% Count 213 12.6% Multiclass 209 12.4% Other structured 37 2.2% Total 1,686 100.0%

Table 4: Environment Distribution by Outcome Kind 

Stress variants. The environment snapshot in-cludes 504 stress variants derived from parent hy-potheses. They perturb task settings while preserv-ing the same interaction protocol and are counted separately from the aggregate corpus totals.              

> Domain NDomain N
> Economics 452 Medicine 334 Biology 325 Earth science 219 Engineering 127 Epidemiology 119 Other scientific domains 110

Table 5: Environment Distribution by Scientific Domain 

Data sources and licences. The environments are drawn from a mixture of general machine-learning repositories, open scientific time-series sources, biological databases, spatial and epidemi-ological data sources, economic indicators, and graph benchmarks (Kelly et al., 2023; Vanschoren et al., 2013; Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 2026; The UniProt Consortium, 2025; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2026a,b; U.S. Ge-ological Survey, 2026; Yelp Inc., 2026; Godahewa et al., 2021; Szklarczyk et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2020). Table 6 reports the source distribution and the li-cence or access metadata recorded in the materi-alised catalogue. OpenML is listed with multiple licences because the source records licence meta-data per dataset. 

Intended use. The SciThèque environments, de-rived trajectories, and trained checkpoints are in-tended for research on training and evaluating scientific-discovery agents. They are not validated scientific findings, medical or public-health ad-vice, economic recommendations, or operational decision-support systems. Derived artifacts retain the access conditions of their upstream sources: public-domain and permissively licensed sources support redistribution only within their stated terms, while sources with non-commercial or no-derivatives conditions are used as research inputs and are not relicensed for broader downstream de-ployment. 

Privacy and content screening. The corpus is built from open scientific, public-service, and benchmark-style data sources rather than newly collected private communications. Source adapters materialise structured analysis variables and ex-clude direct identity fields when those fields are not needed for the scientific task. For example, the Yelp adapter keeps geographic coordinates, open-status, rating, review-count, and structured busi-ness attributes, but does not materialise business names, user identifiers, or review text. This screen-ing is schema- and adapter-based, so it should not be read as a guarantee that every upstream source is free of sensitive or offensive content. The re-leased task prompts and training traces expose only Source N Recorded licence/access basis Metadata scope                                     

> UCI 678 uci-redistributable Source-level catalogue label OpenML 475 public-domain ,cc0-1.0 ,cc-by-4.0 ,cc-by-sa-4.0 Dataset-level OpenML metadata FRED 151 public-domain Source-level catalogue label UniProt 114 cc-by-4.0 Source-level catalogue label CDC FluView 65 public-domain Source-level catalogue label USGS 41 public-domain Source-level catalogue label CDC PLACES 36 public-domain Source-level catalogue label Yelp 40 cc-by-nc-nd-4.0 Source-level catalogue label Monash 31 cc-by-4.0 Source-level catalogue label STRING yeast 34 cc-by-4.0 Source-level catalogue label OGB 21 mit Source-level catalogue label

Table 6: Environment Counts and Metadata Scope by Data Source 

task data and runtime observations; hidden verifier files, reference answers, and tolerance policies are kept outside the policy context and are separately checked by the leakage audit in Appendix B. 

Data provenance and reproducibility. These counts are snapshot metadata for the environment corpus. Each task stores its source adapter, source dataset identifier, upstream provenance and licence metadata, modality, analysis template, prompt, hid-den evidence graph, final checker, and data check-sums. 

Benchmark-overlap audit. The training corpus is audited against the evaluation snapshots used in Section 5.1. The audit compares SHA-256 hashes of materialised training data files with benchmark data files, then separately compares normalised source identifiers, task identifiers, benchmark di-rectory names, and file stems. The audit cov-ers 2,461 training data files with 991 unique file hashes and finds no direct overlap with the avail-able benchmark snapshots: 0/165 DiscoveryBench files, 0/7 DABStep files, and 0/548 DataSciBench files. It also finds zero normalised source-identifier matches for all three benchmarks. The audit is scoped to exact file reuse and source-ID reuse, while broad topical similarity is expected across independently sourced scientific datasets. 

Environment contract. Each environment sepa-rates three roles. The prompt specifies the scientific question and exposes the data. The hidden progress checker defines the ordered evidence needed be-fore a final answer is admissible. The final-answer checker evaluates the submitted scientific claims against task-local reference values and tolerances. The checker is compiled from the same accepted reference analysis that materialises the task, while the tolerances and reference values remain outside the prompt and training transcript. This separa-tion makes intermediate progress inspectable while preserving task-local final scoring. 

Example task. A time-series environment can be written as uj = ( hj , d j , v j ). Here hj asks whether an age-specific influenza-like-illness count helps predict total influenza-like-illness counts at a fixed weekly lag. The data component dj is a weekly regional public-health series with a time index, a target count, age-specific count variables, patient totals, provider totals, and percentage-based illness measures. The verifier vj checks that the trajectory inspects the series, assesses stationarity and sample size, fits an appropriate lagged time-series analysis, runs residual and stability diagnostics, performs a sensitivity check, and submits a conclusion whose significance bucket, effect-strength category, uncer-tainty verdict, and diagnostic outcomes match the task-local reference within the declared tolerances. 

B Verifiability and Leakage Controls 

The environment is designed so that intermediate reward comes from scientific state transitions rather than from matching hidden answer strings. A hid-den evidence graph specifies which analysis steps are currently eligible, what observable evidence they must produce, and which downstream claims they support. The policy never sees this graph di-rectly. Table 7 separates what is visible to the agent from what is used only by the verifier. 

Evidence graph record. Each hidden evidence graph is stored as a task-local record with fields for 

task_id , node_id , process primitive, prerequisite node set, admissible operations, required evidence fields, supported derived claims, tolerance policy, hidden reference values, and visibility flag. Table 8 shows the hidden DAG for the same CDC FluView task whose prompt and accepted rollout appear in Tables 14 and 15. Node identifiers are shown here for auditability only; they are not included in the prompt or transcript. 

Progress rule. A turn receives progress only when it produces new, inspectable evidence for exactly one eligible scientific step. Eligibility is defined by the current frontier of the hidden graph: a node Surface Visible to the agent Used by the verifier                           

> Task prompt Hypothesis, avail-able data, requested answer format, and analysis con-straints. Prompt consis-tency checks and final-answer field expectations. Data files Input data available to the agent for anal-ysis. Runtime evidence produced by the agent from those data. Intermediate observations Execution output, errors, summaries, and feedback after each action. Whether the action produced new ev-idence for exactly one currently eligible step. Hidden evi-dence graph Not visible. Prerequisites, re-quired evidence, supported claims, and progress state. Reference an-swers Not visible. Final-answer scoring and task-local toler-ance checks.

Table 7: Visibility split between agent context and veri-fier state 

is available only after all of its prerequisites have been accepted. Repeating an already completed analysis, jumping to a future step before its pre-requisites, bundling several steps into one action, or submitting the final answer prematurely leaves the hidden progress state unchanged. The termi-nal submission is credited only after the required intermediate evidence has been completed and the submitted claims pass the final checker. 

Claim derivation. For claim-bearing steps, the verifier derives the relevant quantities from runtime evidence rather than trusting printed final literals. This prevents a trajectory from receiving progress simply by echoing a target value or by writing an answer-shaped string. A step must therefore both execute the appropriate analysis and expose enough structured evidence for the environment to vali-date the scientific quantity being claimed. Final checkers compare submitted answer fields against task-local references using hidden tolerance poli-cies; the tolerance values are never serialized into prompts or exported SFT transcripts. 

Expert review. The verifier mechanism was man-ually reviewed by 10 domain experts whose ex-pertise covered the scientific domains represented in the environment corpus. The review focused on whether the evidence primitives, prerequisite ordering, diagnostic requirements, and acceptance criteria were appropriate for the corresponding do-main and analysis template. Reviewers inspected the mechanism-level verifier specifications rather than model outputs, so this audit checks the scien-tific plausibility of the progress rules rather than measuring rollout-level verifier precision. 

Leakage controls. Prompts and training traces are screened for direct exposure of reference answers, hidden step identifiers, hidden checklist language, task-local tolerance values, or checker code. The final-answer checker and hidden progress specifica-tion are not copied into the training transcript. The materialisation audit scans prompts before mani-fest emission, and the transcript-conversion audit scans retained SFT traces before training-data ex-port. A failed audit excludes the task or trace from the emitted corpus. These checks are especially im-portant for supervised trajectories: a retained trace must demonstrate the analysis path, not merely re-produce values that were available to the trajectory generator. 

Example verifier trace. Table 9 shows the veri-fier information associated with the accepted 10-step CDC FluView rollout in Table 15. The table reports the hidden verifier match and the visible evidence exposed to the policy after each action. During training, the policy observes the accepted flag and the observation text; the node labels are used only by the environment and are shown here for auditability. 

Leakage exposure scan. The leakage scan checks the final RL prompt manifest and retained SFT traces for direct exposure of hidden verifier state outside the runtime evidence produced by executed analysis. The scan in Table 10 covers reference answer values in prompts or answer-format hints, task-local tolerance strings, hidden node identifiers, checker or gold-artifact markers, and generator-only markers. 

C Trajectory Synthesis and Filtering 

The cold-start corpus is built from successful en-vironment interactions rather than from free-form teacher answers. Each retained trajectory must complete the hidden evidence graph, receive ac-cepted progress at every required analysis step, and pass the final-answer checker. Table 11 summa-rizes the synthesis and filtering stages. 

Retained corpus. The cold-start corpus contains 5,620 verified trajectories produced from accepted environment interactions. 

Filtering boundary. Filtered traces are kept for diagnostics but excluded from training. The filter enforces whether a trajectory demonstrates the re-Hidden node Primitive Prerequisite Verifier evidence Rollout turn 

setup_time_series_data Data setup None Loaded frame, role map, target, candidate variable, time index, and frequency. 1

prepare_series_frame EDA summary Setup Sorted series frame with sample-size, shape, missing-ness, stationarity, and serial-dependence metrics. 2

build_lagged_design Feature extraction Series frame Lag-1 design matrix with target, candidate, control, and lagged columns. 3

fit_temporal_model Model fit Lagged design P-value and effect-size evidence for the selected tem-poral model. 4

check_stationarity Diagnostic Model fit ADF stationarity evidence for the target series. 5

check_residual_whiteness Diagnostic Model fit Ljung-Box and lag-1 autocorrelation evidence for residual dependence. 6

check_arch_effects Diagnostic Model fit ARCH-effect diagnostic over fitted residuals. 7

estimate_temporal_ci Uncertainty Model fit Confidence interval evidence for whether the effect overlaps the null. 8

check_convergence Diagnostic Model fit Warning-aware convergence status for a fitted or al-ternative temporal model. 9

check_sensitivity Robustness Model fit Main and alternative verdict comparison for method sensitivity. 10 

submit Terminal Nodes 2–10 Submitted claims pass the final checker after required evidence is complete. 11 

Table 8: Hidden evidence DAG for a CDC FluView time-series task 

Turn Verifier match Decision Visible evidence 

1 setup_time_series_data Accepted setup Loaded 1,379 rows and 12 columns; printed the first rows. 2 prepare_series_frame Accepted EDA summary Reported rows, effective sample size, column count, and descriptive statistics. 3 build_lagged_design Accepted feature extraction Built a lag-1 design matrix with 1,378 rows and seven columns. 4 fit_temporal_model Accepted model fit Reported temporal model evidence with p = 9.38 ×

10 −26 .5 check_stationarity Accepted diagnostic Reported ADF stationarity evidence with p = 1 .41 ×

10 −4.6 check_residual_whiteness Accepted diagnostic Reported Ljung–Box residual evidence and lag-1 autocorre-lation. 7 check_arch_effects Accepted diagnostic Reported ARCH-effect evidence with p = 1.24 ×

10 −266 .8 estimate_temporal_ci Accepted uncertainty check Reported the effect confidence interval, 5.25–5.41. 9 check_convergence Accepted diagnostic Reported warning-aware convergence status as yes. 10 check_sensitivity Accepted robustness check Reported that the main verdict was not method-sensitive across three alternatives. 11 submit Accepted final submission Final submission accepted after the required verifier state was complete. 

Table 9: Verifier trace for the CDC FluView rollout 

Surface Audit target Checked Flagged 

Prompt Reference answer values 1,686 0Prompt Tolerance strings 1,686 0Prompt Hidden node identifiers 1,686 0Prompt Checker or gold markers 1,686 0Prompt Generator-only markers 1,686 0SFT trace Hidden node identifiers 5,620 0SFT trace Tolerance strings 5,620 0SFT trace Checker or gold markers 5,620 0SFT trace Generator-only markers 5,620 0

Table 10: Leakage exposure scan for prompts and retained SFT traces 

quired scientific process rather than only whether it reaches the final answer. 

D Training Details 

Training has two stages. Cold-start supervised tun-ing teaches the solver the interaction format and rhythm of evidence-backed analysis. Agentic RL then optimizes the same protocol using environ-ment turn-level progress signals. Table 12 reports the training and rollout hyperparameters. 

Turn-level signal. For each prompt group, the environment records turns that complete new sci-entific progress. A rollout receives positive signal on turns that advance the hidden evidence state; in-valid, repeated, premature, or bundled turns receive no progress. The RL objective compares sibling rollouts at the same interaction position, emphasiz-ing which action was better under the same prompt and comparable history length. 

Filtering of uninformative groups. Prompt groups with no turn-level contrast are removed be-fore optimization. This avoids updates where all siblings make identical progress, all fail, or all ter-minate without a distinguishable learning signal. Stage Purpose Admission criterion 

Evidence planning Decompose the task into a prerequisite-ordered sequence of scientific analysis steps. The hidden graph is well formed and all required claims are represented. Trajectory scheduling Create valid analysis orders or presenta-tion variants for each environment. The schedule re-spects prerequisites and ends with a final submission. Execution Run each scheduled analysis step in an isolated environment and collect observa-tions. The action executes within the turn bud-get and produces ob-servable evidence. Verification Check each turn against the hidden progress rule and score the final an-swer. Every required anal-ysis step is accepted and the final answer passes. Conversion Keep only messages suitable for model training. The transcript fits the token budget and passes leakage checks for hidden labels, hidden tol-erances, reference values, and answer strings. 

Table 11: Trajectory Synthesis and Filtering Pipeline for the Cold-Start Corpus 

Hyperparameter Value 

Cold-start supervised tuning 

Backbone Qwen3-14B Corpus SciDisco-produced Epochs 1Effective batch size 128 Learning rate 1 × 10 −5

Min learning rate 1 × 10 −6

Schedule Cosine decay Warm-up fraction 0.1 Weight decay 0.1 Context length 24,576 tokens 

Agentic RL 

Initial checkpoint SciDisco-14B-SFT Learning rate 1 × 10 −6

Schedule Constant Rollout batch size 16 Global batch size 128 Rollout group size 8Max turns 30 Per-turn generation cap 4,096 tokens Prompt cap 8,192 tokens Trajectory context cap 24,576 tokens Sampling temperature 1.0 Top-p 0.95 Clip high 0.28 Clip low 0.2 Weight decay 0.1 Adam beta 1 0.9 Adam beta 2 0.98 Action timeout 60 s 

Table 12: Training and Rollout Hyperparameters 

The filter is therefore not a data-quality heuristic; it removes batches whose relative advantage is math-ematically uninformative. 

Execution budget. Each scientific analysis action runs under a fixed wall-clock timeout. The timeout bounds inefficient code and accidental infinite com-putations while allowing common statistical, graph, time-series, and spatial analyses to complete. 

E DiscoPO Objective Details 

The policy update assigns Aj,k,t to the policy-generated tokens in turn t and excludes obser-vation tokens from the loss. Let Ij,k,t denote the generated-token positions in that turn. For 

i ∈ I j,k,t , let yi be the generated token and pi

its prefix. The likelihood ratio is: 

ρi(θ) = πθ(yi | pi)

πold (yi | pi) . (14) The clipped ratio is: 

¯ρi(θ) = clip ( ρi(θ), 1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh ) . (15) For each generated token, the clipped surrogate is: 

ℓi(θ) = min ( ρi(θ)Aj,k,t , ¯ρi(θ)Aj,k,t ) . (16) DiscoPO optimizes the turn-averaged objective: 

¯ℓj,k,t (θ) = 1

> |I j,k,t |

P

> i∈I j,k,t

ℓi(θ),

LDiscoPO (θ) = −Ej,k,t 

¯ℓj,k,t (θ) .

(17) 

F Prompt and Rollout Trace 

The interaction trace consists of a system prompt, a task prompt, alternating assistant actions and en-vironment observations, and a terminal submission. Tables 13 and 14 give the system and task prompts used for the rollout in Table 15. 

Rollout. Table 15 gives the same task’s rollout tra-jectory. The trace has 10 analysis actions and one final submission; each environment observation is accepted. 

G Failure Cases 

Rejected turns define the training-signal bound-ary. Table 16 summarizes the major failure modes guarded by the verifier during synthesis and RL interaction. # Role You are a data scientist investigating a statistical hypothesis on a scientific dataset. Each turn first writes one short <thought>, then emits exactly one native action: <python>...</python> or <submit></submit>. # Turn shape Every assistant turn MUST follow this structure: <thought>One or two sentences naming the next scientific analysis step.</thought> <python> # ordinary notebook-style scientific Python </python> When the analysis is complete, use this final action instead of Python: <submit></submit> # Rules - Every assistant turn MUST open with a <thought>...</thought> block (1-2 sentences). The block exists for short orientation only. - Use the thought to name the next analysis step in natural language, such as data setup, feature construction, model fit, diagnostic check, sensitivity analysis, or final submission. - Put ordinary notebook-style scientific code inside <python>...</python>. Load the task data, inspect it, fit appropriate models or tests, and print concise intermediate results when useful. - Kernel state persists across Python turns, so reuse variables from prior work instead of reloading everything each time. - Use exactly one native action per turn. Do not combine Python and submit in the same turn. - Use <submit></submit> only when the analysis is complete. 

Table 13: System Prompt for Scientific Discovery Rollouts 

# Hypothesis Does `num_age_0 ` Granger-cause `num_ili ` at lag 1? # Data Dataset: `cdc_flu_hhs10 `

Files (load with pandas.read_parquet or pandas.read_csv): - data/series.parquet Time index column: `time_index `; frequency: `W-MON `

Value columns: - `num_ili ` (kind=continuous, role=target) - `num_patients ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `num_providers ` (kind=count, role=candidate_iv) - `ili ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `wili ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_0 ` (kind=count, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_1 ` (kind=count, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_2 ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_3 ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_4 ` (kind=continuous, role=candidate_iv) - `num_age_5 ` (kind=count, role=candidate_iv) Dataset relative path: `data `

# Analysis expectations Use Python to investigate the hypothesis step by step. Load the dataset files described above, inspect the relevant variables, run appropriate statistical analyses and diagnostics, and finish when your scientific conclusion is ready. 

Table 14: Task Prompt for the CDC FluView Rollout Turn Assistant action Environment observation 

1 <thought>I’ll start by loading the dataset the task points to at `data `.</thought> <python> loaded the series frame and printed its first rows </python> accepted: true Loaded 1379 rows × 12 columns printed the first five rows 

2 <thought>I’ll run code to summarize the dataset evidence needed for analysis.</thought> <python> sorted by time_index; computed rows, effective_n, and descriptive statistics </python> accepted: true rows: 1379, effective_n: 1378, columns: 12 printed descriptive statistics 

3 <thought>Before analysis continues, I need the design matrix.</thought> <python> built lagged_design with target, predictors, and lag-1 columns </python> accepted: true lagged_design rows: 1378, cols: 7 

4 <thought>I’ll run the model fit and summarize the analysis evidence and inspect the output.</thought> <python> ran Granger and VAR fits; recorded p-value and effect-size evidence </python> accepted: true n: 1379, lag: 1 fit_summary: p_value=9.38e-26 

5 <thought>I’ll run code to check the relevant diagnostic evidence.</thought> <python> ran augmented Dickey-Fuller stationarity check </python> accepted: true adf_p: 0.000141 

6 <thought>I’ll check the relevant diagnostic evidence and inspect the output.</thought> <python> ran Ljung-Box residual-dependence check </python> accepted: true ljung_p: 0, lag1_acf: 0.961 

7 <thought>The data is ready, so I’ll check the relevant diagnostic evidence.</thought> <python> ran ARCH-effect diagnostic </python> accepted: true arch_p: 1.24e-266 

8 <thought>I’ll run the analysis code and inspect the resulting evidence and inspect the output.</thought> <python> computed confidence interval for the relevant effect estimate </python> accepted: true ci: 5.25-5.41 

9 <thought>This cell continues the notebook by running code to check the relevant diagnostic evidence.</thought> <python> fit ARIMA(1,0,0) and checked convergence warnings </python> accepted: true converged: yes 

10 <thought>The data is ready, so I’ll run the analysis code and inspect the resulting evidence.</thought> <python> compared the main verdict with alternative method verdicts </python> accepted: true sensitivity summary no, alternatives 3 

11 <thought>The analysis is complete; time to submit.</thought> <submit></submit> accepted: true message: final submission accepted 

Table 15: Accepted Rollout Trace for a CDC FluView Time-Series Task Failure mode Typical cause Training consequence 

Premature final answer The model submits before completing the re-quired intermediate analyses. No final-submission credit; the hidden progress state is unchanged. Compound analysis One turn bundles several scientific steps that should be separately verified. The turn is rejected even if some compu-tation is correct. No new evidence The action repeats an earlier result or prints un-supported claims without producing verifiable analysis output. No progress credit is assigned. Wrong prerequisite order The model attempts a later analysis before the necessary setup or diagnostic evidence exists. The action is treated as ineligible for progress. Unverifiable claim The output contains answer-like text, but the rel-evant value cannot be derived from runtime evi-dence. The claim is ignored for progress and can-not support final credit. Execution failure The analysis errors, times out, or produces degen-erate outputs. The failed turn receives no progress, but later turns may still produce accepted ev-idence. Final-answer mismatch The intermediate process is complete, but the submitted values fail task-local tolerance checks. The trajectory is not retained for super-vised training and receives no successful terminal credit. 

Table 16: Failure Modes and Training Consequences