Title: Automated Conjecture Resolution with Formal Verification

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03789v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:40:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
April 7, 2026 

# Automated Conjecture Resolution with Formal Veri-fication 

## Haocheng Ju 1,5,†,∗, Guoxiong Gao 1,5,‡,∗, Jiedong Jiang 2,∗, Bin Wu 4,10 ,∗,

## Zeming Sun 1,3,∗, Leheng Chen 1,5,10 , Yutong Wang 1,5, Yuefeng Wang 1,

## Zichen Wang 1,5, Wanyi He 1,5, Peihao Wu 5, Liang Xiao 6, Ruochuan Liu 6,

## Bryan Dai 5,¶, Bin Dong 7,8,9,10 ¶

> 1

School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 

> 2

Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, Westlake University 

> 3

Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University 

> 4

School of Mathematics, Tianjin University 

> 5

IQuest Research 

> 6

New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University 

> 7

Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research and the New Cornerstone Science Laboratory, Peking University 

> 8

Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University 

> 9

Center for Intelligent Computing, Great Bay Institute for Advanced Study, Great Bay University 

> 10

Zhongguancun Academy 

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have significantly improved their ability to perform mathematical reasoning, extending from elementary problem solving to increasingly capable performance on research-level problems. However, reliably solving and verifying such problems remains challenging due to the inherent ambiguity of natural language reasoning and the need for rigorous validation. In this paper, we propose an automated framework for tackling research-level mathematical problems that integrates natural language reasoning with formal verification, enabling end-to-end problem solving with minimal human intervention. Our framework consists of two components: an informal reasoning agent, Rethlas, and a formal verification agent, Archon. Rethlas mimics the workflow of human mathematicians by combining reasoning primitives with our mathematical theorem search engine, Matlas, to explore solution strategies and construct candidate proofs. Archon, equipped with our formal theorem search engine LeanSearch, translates informal arguments into fully formalized Lean 4 projects through structured task decomposition, iterative refinement, and automated proof synthesis, ensuring machine-checkable correctness. Using this framework, we automatically resolve an open problem in commutative algebra proposed by D. D. Anderson (2014) and formally verify the resulting proof in Lean 4 with essentially no human involvement. Our experiments demonstrate that strong theorem retrieval tools enable the discovery and application of deep, cross-domain mathematical techniques, while the formal agent is capable of autonomously filling nontrivial gaps in informal arguments. More broadly, our work illustrates a promising paradigm for mathematical research in which informal and formal reasoning systems, equipped with theorem retrieval tools, operate in tandem to produce verifiable results, substantially reduce human effort, and offer a concrete instantiation of human–AI collaborative mathematical research with minimal human involvement. 

> ∗

Equal Contribution, †Informal Agent Lead, ‡Formal Agent Lead, ¶Corresponding author  

> Correspondence :

cbdai@iquestlab.com , dongbin@math.pku.edu.cn  

> Rethlas Source:

https://github.com/frenzymath/Rethlas  

> Archon Source:

https://github.com/frenzymath/Archon  

> Formalization Results :

https://github.com/frenzymath/Anderson-Conjecture 

> arXiv:2604.03789v1 [cs.LG] 4 Apr 2026

2

## 1 Introduction 

In recent years, the mathematical reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs) have advanced rapidly, progressing from handling elementary arithmetic and high-school–level problems to demonstrating competence across undergraduate curricula and beginning to engage with graduate- and research-level mathematics. Early models such as GPT-3 struggled with basic arithmetic, whereas GPT-4 [ 2] achieved a high score (92%) on the grade-school benchmark GSM8K. With the emergence of test-time scaling , where models allocate increased computational resources to reasoning during inference, systems such as OpenAI’s o1 have shown strong performance on high-school competition problems, including AIME. Subsequent reasoning models [ 12 , 22 , 38 , 40 ] have further validated the effectiveness of this paradigm. A notable milestone was achieved by Google’s Gemini Deep Think, which reached gold-medal–level performance at the International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) using purely natural-language reasoning. At a higher level, recent studies suggest that LLMs have also become increasingly capable in undergraduate and graduate mathematics, while continuing to make progress on research-level problems. For example, [ 29 ]showed that frontier models available at the time, such as Gemini 2.5 Pro, scored above 90 on a benchmark of undergraduate mathematics exams. The same study also found that o3-mini achieved an average score above 80 on PhD qualifying exams in Analysis, Probability, Algebra, and Geometry & Topology. Open-source models have also demonstrated strong performance; for instance, [ 28 ] reported that DeepSeek-R1 achieves 71.0% proof accuracy on graduate-level algebra tasks. At the research level, progress is ongoing. On the FrontierMath 

benchmark [ 21 ], whose Tier 4 consists of unpublished research-level problems, o3-mini achieves only 4% pass@1 accuracy, whereas GPT-5 improves this to 15%. More recently, the leading system, GPT-5.4-Pro (web), reaches 38% pass@1 accuracy. Notably, GPT-5.4-Pro has also solved an open problem in combinatorics from 

FrontierMath that is categorized as “moderately interesting”. Building on these frontier models, LLM-based agents equipped with appropriate harness engineering can further enhance performance. For example, the 

Aletheia agent [ 17 ], which integrates a generator, a verifier, and a reviser, has autonomously tackled four Erdős problems [ 16 ] and addressed research questions such as computing eigenweights for the Arithmetic Hirzebruch Proportionality Principle [ 14 ], as well as problems concerning the simplicity of the Hodge bundle [37]. However, despite these advances, evaluating the research-level capabilities of LLMs and LLM-based agents remains a significant bottleneck that requires substantial human effort. As mathematical complexity increases, evaluation increasingly relies on domain experts; however, due to the inherent imprecision of natural language, even experienced mathematicians can occasionally misjudge arguments. Indeed, errors can persist even within the rigorous peer-review processes of top journals. To enable fast and reliable verification of mathematical reasoning, it is therefore necessary to move toward more mechanized and unambiguous frameworks. Formal systems provide precisely such a foundation. Formal systems provide precisely such a foundation: a precise symbolic language paired with rigorously defined mechanisms for constructing and verifying proofs. Once a mathematical argument is translated into a formal language while preserving its semantic content, its correctness can be verified with complete rigor. Motivated by this, we propose a framework for autonomously tackling and verifying research-level mathematics that integrates a natural language reasoning agent with a formalization agent, enabling end-to-end problem solving with minimal human supervision. The informal agent, Rethlas 1, is designed to mimic the workflow of human mathematicians and is equipped with tools such as theorem retrieval to explore candidate solution paths. The formal agent, Archon 2, builds on a dual-agent, tool-augmented architecture and is equipped with our formal theorem search engine LeanSearch [ 19 ]. It transforms informal proofs into fully verified Lean 4 projects through structured planning, iterative formalization, and persistent memory management, ensuring both correctness and scalability. Using this framework, we automatically resolve an open problem in commutative algebra proposed by D. D. Anderson in 2014 [ 8] and formally verify the resulting proof in Lean 4 with essentially no human intervention. During the natural language solving phase, the semantic theorem search engine Matlas, employed by Rethlas, 

> 1Rethlas is open-sourced at https://github.com/frenzymath/Rethlas.
> 2Archon is open-sourced at https://github.com/frenzymath/Archon.

3plays a crucial role in discovering a key technical result by Jensen [ 27 ]. During formalization, Archon demonstrates its strong mathematical capability by filling non-trivial gaps left in the references and the natural language proof. The formalization have passed the check of Comparator 3.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review related work on agents for natural language and formal reasoning. Section 3 provides an overview of our framework. Experimental results for informal proof generation are presented in Section 4, while formalization results are discussed in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Agents for Natural Language Reasoning 

LLM-based agents have recently demonstrated strong performance in both high-school olympiad mathematics and research-level mathematics. In the context of olympiad mathematics, a representative work is [ 24 ], which proposes a verification-and-refinement pipeline that successfully solves 5 out of 6 problems from the IMO 2025 using models such as Gemini 2.5 Pro, Grok-4, and GPT-5. This significantly surpasses the baseline performance of these models without such a structured workflow. At the research level, the Aletheia agent [ 17 ], built upon an advanced version of Gemini Deep Think, operates through an iterative process involving a generator, a verifier, and a reviser. It has tackled four Erdős problems in an autonomous manner [ 16 ], as well as a generalized Erdős problem in a semi-autonomous setting with human collaboration [ 5]. Beyond these, Aletheia has also addressed genuine research problems, including computing eigenweights for the Arithmetic Hirzebruch Proportionality Principle [ 14 ] and establishing bounds for independence sets [ 31 ]. Furthermore, Aletheia solved 6 out of 10 problems in the FirstProof benchmark [ 15 ], introduced in [ 1], which consists of real research problems solved by human mathematicians but not publicly released at the time of evaluation. In parallel, the FullProof system [ 7] demonstrates effective human–AI collaboration in algebraic geometry: the AI handles special cases, humans provide insights for the general case, and the AI subsequently completes the general solution based on these hints. 

2.2 Agents for Formal Reasoning 

Several agent systems targeting Lean 4 have recently achieved strong results on competition-level benchmarks. AlphaProof [ 25 ], the pioneering RL-based agent from Google DeepMind, achieved silver-medal performance at IMO 2024. Seed-Prover 1.5 [ 10 ] trains tool-calling capabilities directly into the model and solves 11 of 12 Putnam 2025 problems. AxiomProver [ 6 ] and the open-source Numina-Lean-Agent [ 32 ] each solve all 12. Harmonic’s Aristotle [ 3], which augments a fine-tuned proof-search model with MCTS and an informal reasoning pipeline, achieves IMO 2025 gold-medal performance and offers a public API to the community. Beyond competition benchmarks, several of these systems have demonstrated research-level capabilities. Aristotle and AxiomProver have each formalized solutions to open Erdős problems in Lean; AxiomProver has also solved and formalized open research conjectures such as Fel’s conjecture on syzygies of numerical semigroups [ 9]. With greater human involvement, Numina-Lean-Agent collaboratively formalized the Brascamp– Lieb theorem with two human experts [ 32 ], and the VML project [ 26 ] formalizes a result in mathematical physics with a single mathematician providing interactive guidance over ten days. At a larger scale, Math, Inc.’s Gauss [ 34 ] produces approximately 200,000 lines of Lean code to formally verify the Fields-Medal-winning sphere packing proofs; for dimension 8, Gauss built upon a human-prepared blueprint pre-existing repository, while dimension 24 was autoformalized from the original paper. On the tooling side, Mistral’s Leanstral [ 35 ]offers an open-source agent designed for proof engineering in research-level formalization projects. 

## 3 Overview of the Framework 

In this section, we describe our framework for autonomously tackling and verifying research-level mathematics. The framework consists of an informal agent (Rethlas), which first generates a candidate proof that is 

> 3https://github.com/leanprover/comparator

4Generation Agent           

> Propose Candidate Proofs
> Verification Agent
> Verify Candidate Proofs
> call
> Tools Matlas
> Theorem Retrieval
> Web Search
> Reference Lookup …Memory Manage
> Reading & Logging
> call
> Skills Construct exam ples Construct counterexam ples Propose subgoal decomposition plans Indentify key failures
> Archon
> (Re)Write Formal Sketch
> split files & theorems
> compile &
> semantics
> no
> yes Formalize
> generate & fix proof
> 0 sorry &
> compiles
> yes no
> Strategies
> ①Ask Informal Agent (Detailing)
> for more detailed proof steps
> ②Decompose
> split into smaller sub-lemmas
> ③Ask Informal Agent (Re-routing)
> for alternative proof route (bypass formal difficulty)
> retry
> Final Checks
> Polish & Done
> warnings · redundancy
> specificity
> formal agent
> Rethlas
> in formal agent
> …
> Candidate Informal Proof

Figure 1 Overview of the framework pipeline. 

potentially correct, and a formal agent (Archon), which translates this informal proof into the formal language Lean 4 and fills in any gaps during the formalization process (see Figure 1). The design of the informal agent Rethlas is presented in Section 3.1, and the design of the formal agent Archon is presented in Section 3.2. 

3.1 Rethlas: The Informal Agent 

Rethlas consists of two subagents: a generation agent and a verification agent. As shown in Figure 2, it operates in an iterative process in which the generation agent produces an informal proof and passes it to the verification agent for correctness checking. If the proof passes verification, it is considered a candidate informal proof and the process terminates. Otherwise, the verification agent provides feedback, which is passed back to the generation agent to revise the proof. 

Generation agent. The generation agent is designed to mimic the workflow of human mathematicians and is equipped with skills and tools tailored to mathematical research. These skills consist of reasoning primitives distilled from the processes mathematicians employ when tackling research problems, and they include: 

• Construct toy examples. This skill is used when reasoning becomes stalled and simpler instances are needed to regain traction. The constructed examples should satisfy both the assumptions and the conclusion, allowing one to observe how the assumptions take effect and to develop intuition. When applying this skill, one should look for recurring patterns, invariants, or potential proof strategies suggested by the examples. Reasoning, decomposition, and retrieval may also be used to identify suitable examples or simplify the setting. 

• Construct counterexamples. This skill is used when a conjecture or intermediate claim appears fragile or insufficiently justified. The goal is to test whether the assumptions can hold while the conclusion fails. When applying this skill, one should leverage reasoning, decomposition, and retrieval to identify standard obstructions, pathological constructions, or known counterexamples. 

• Search relevant results. This skill is used to obtain theorems, constructions, examples, counterexamples, or background knowledge relevant to the current problem. It is also useful when constructing examples or counterexamples, or when proving subgoals that require supporting references. When a potentially useful theorem is found, one should expand the definitions and concepts involved using the surrounding context of the source, carefully verify its applicability to the current setting, and be explicit about any shifts in terminology across contexts. In addition, one should not stop at the statement alone, but also examine the proof to extract useful techniques, constructions, reductions, or proof patterns. 

• Propose subgoal decomposition plans. This skill is used after gathering sufficient insight from examples, counterexamples, search results, and prior attempts. 

• Direct proving. This skill is applied once one or more decomposition plans are available. Each plan is evaluated by attempting to prove its subgoals directly, while identifying key obstacles if the plan does not fully succeed. 

• Recursive proving. This skill is used when all current decomposition plans have been attempted via 5Generation Agent 

> Propose Candidate Proofs
> Verification Agent
> Verify Candidate Proofs
> call

Tools  Matlas  

> Theorem Retrieval
> Web Search
> Reference Lookup …Memory Manage
> Reading & Logging
> call

Skills  Construct exam ples  Construct counterexam ples  Propose subgoal decomposition plans  Indentify key failures 

Figure 2 Rethlas Agent. 

direct proving but none fully succeed. In this case, multiple subagents are deployed in parallel, each assigned a decomposition plan together with its associated key difficulties and those identified in other plans. Each subagent may refine, extend, or locally revise its assigned plan, while maintaining continuity rather than discarding it entirely. 

• Identify key failures. This skill is used when recursive attempts across all decomposition plans fail. The objective is to identify common patterns in these failures, such as recurring obstructions, ineffective decomposition strategies, or missing background knowledge. These insights are then summarized to guide the next iteration of plan generation. As reflected in the above descriptions, these skills are not isolated but interconnected. Applying one skill often involves elements of others. For example, constructing examples and counterexamples does not occur in isolation; it typically requires reasoning, problem decomposition, and retrieval to identify appropriate constructions. When tackling a math problem, the agent is instructed to assess the current state and choose appropriate skills to apply, rather than deciding a fixed order of skills beforehand. Among the tools used in Rethlas, our theorem search engine Matlas 4 plays a central role. In our experiments, Matlas serves as a semantic search engine over mathematical statements from arXiv, including definitions, propositions, theorems, corollaries, examples, and remarks. Its corpus contains approximately 13.6 million such statements, each embedded into a vector database. Given a query in the form of a mathematical statement, Matlas embeds the query and performs nearest-neighbor search using cosine similarity to retrieve relevant results. Compared to general web search, Matlas provides a more fine-grained and principled retrieval mechanism tailored to mathematical content. Although its corpus is smaller, it is more structured and enables more precise identification of relevant statements. When applying the search-math-results skill, Rethlas is instructed to first query Matlas and retrieve relevant theorems, examples, or counterexamples. It may then use web search either to gather additional background information and terminology, or to further explore references suggested by the results returned by Matlas. In addition, Rethlas maintains a working memory of intermediate artifacts generated during the reasoning process, such as constructed examples, counterexamples, and subgoal decomposition plans. The agent is instructed to write these artifacts to memory and to query this memory when needed, enabling the reuse of previously generated insights and improving coherence across reasoning steps. In our experiments, the generation agent is implemented using the OpenAI Codex agent framework, with GPT-5.4 as the underlying base model. 

> 4

The version of Matlas used in the Rethlas experiments is a preliminary internal test system, implemented as an arXiv-based theorem search engine available at https://leansearch.net/thm/. Its corpus consists of approximately 13.6 million mathematical statements extracted directly from arXiv papers without further processing. Our latest Matlas system, available at https://matlas.ai/, is a more advanced theorem search engine built from 8.51 million statements collected from 435K published papers across 180 journals and over 1,900 textbooks. As a result, it provides a more reliable and curated source of mathematical results. In addition, we extract statement dependencies and perform hierarchical unfolding to make statements more self-contained, which further improves their usability and quality compared to the earlier arXiv-based version. The previous arXiv-based theorem search engine will be deprecated in the near future. 6 

> Verification agent.

The verification agent is equipped with skills for checking the correctness of mathematical proofs. These include verifying statements sequentially, such as examining skipped or hand-wavy steps, identifying critical errors and gaps, and carefully assessing whether apparently unused assumptions are genuinely redundant or instead indicate an omitted argument. They also include confirming referenced statements, by checking, using our theorem search tool Matlas and web search, whether a cited statement exists and is applicable in the current context, expanding the definitions and terminology in the cited statement using the context of the source paper, and ensuring that terms used in the current proof carry the same meaning as in the cited source, since identical words may have different definitions in different contexts. In our experiments, the verification agent is implemented using the OpenAI Codex agent with GPT-5.4 as the underlying model. 

3.2 Archon: The Formal Agent 

Mathematical proofs demand complete rigor, yet even expert-written proofs may contain subtle flaws, and proofs produced by LLMs, which are prone to hallucination, are far less reliable. To obtain trustworthy guarantees of correctness, we introduce formal verification into the pipeline. If a proof passes the formal language compiler, then verifying correctness reduces to checking that the top-level statement and its supporting definitions faithfully capture the intended mathematical content. We adopt Lean 4 as our formal language. Its community-maintained library Mathlib comprises over 267,000 theorems and 127,000 definitions contributed by more than 770 members, providing a well-established foundation that makes formalization of frontier mathematics feasible, as every dependent definition and lemma must ultimately be grounded in existing libraries. The formal agent, Archon , extends our prior work on statement autoformalization [ 20 , 39 ] to full proof formalization: given an informal proof, it produces a Lean 4 project that states and proves the target theorem together with all supporting definitions and lemmas, grounded in Mathlib. Archon first initializes the project by collecting dependent references, then formalizes key statements and definitions, organizing them into topic-specific files. It proceeds iteratively, filling gaps omitted in the literature, consulting the informal agent or external sources when stuck, and exploring alternative formalization strategies until the entire project compiles. Prior to deployment on proofs generated by Rethlas, we validated Archon on FirstProof [ 1 ], a collection of 10 research-level problems without publicly released solutions at the time, avoiding data contamination. Both OpenAI [ 36 ] and Google [ 15 ] evaluated their systems on these problems. We selected Problems 4 and 6 based on Mathlib infrastructure support and mathematical significance; notably, Google’s Aletheia failed on both, while OpenAI succeeded but with human supervision. Archon produced complete formalizations of OpenAI’s informal proofs for both problems: Problem 6 was formalized fully autonomously, and Problem 4 required only a single natural-language hint on the proof direction for one lemma. Formalization of Problem 4 took approximately 50 hours and $1,200 in API costs; Problem 6 took 30 hours and $750. 5 Section 3.2.1 reviews the workflow and architecture, and Section 3.2.2 describes enhancements since our initial release. 

3.2.1 System Architecture and Workflow Design 

Our core design principle is to avoid hard-coded workflows and instead equip the agent with sufficient skills and tools, granting it maximal autonomy. However, we observed that in long-running sessions, particularly when the agent confronts difficult lemmas, accumulated context degrades performance: the agent’s own failed attempts and pessimistic annotations erode its willingness to persevere. To address this, we introduced a dual-agent architecture consisting of a Plan Agent , which operates in a fresh context to decompose tasks and provide targeted guidance, and a Lean Agent , which executes formalization within a constrained scope. This separation substantially mitigates context pollution and task-aversion (e.g., context containing accumulated failures was observed to correlate with reduced agent persistence on difficult obligations). The formalization process is divided into three phases (Figure 3):  

> 5For more details, see our blog post at https://frenzymath.com/blog/archon-firstproof/

7Archon Workflow         

> Read & Search
> Informal Materials
> (Re)Write Formal Sketch
> split files & theorems
> compile &
> semantics
> no
> yes Formalize
> generate & fix proof
> 0 sorry &
> compiles
> yes no
> Strategies
> ①Ask Informal Agent (Detailing)
> for more detailed proof steps
> ②Decompose
> split into smaller sub-lemmas
> ③Ask Informal Agent (Re-routing)
> for alternative proof route (bypass formal difficulty)
> retry
> Final Checks
> Polish & Done
> warnings · redundancy
> specificity
> Lean Agent Lean Agent + Plan Agent Lean Agent
> Scaffolding Proving Verification and Polish

Figure 3 Archon Workflow Agent System      

> Plan Agent
> Summary, Strategy & Decomposition
> (Multi) Lean Agent(s)
> (Parallel) Proof Attempts
> ①dispatch ②iterate
> call
> result
> Tools
> Ask Informal Agent
> Natural Language Reasoning
> LeanSearch
> Theorem-Definition Retrieval
> Lean LSP MCP
> Diagnostics & Searching
> Web Search
> Reference Lookup
> ⋯
> Memory Manage
> Reading & Logging

Figure 4 Agent System and Tools 

1. Scaffolding. The Lean Agent analyzes the informal proof and constructs the initial file structure: splitting the proof into modules, defining theorem signatures, and placing sorry placeholders at each proof obligation. This decomposition is not fixed and may be revised as the proof develops. 2. Proving. The Lean Agent and Plan Agent enter an iterative cycle. The Lean Agent attempts to discharge 

sorry placeholders; when stuck, it returns diagnostics to the Plan Agent, which re-evaluates the proof strategy and dispatches a revised task. When the decomposition yields independent proof obligations, multiple Lean Agents can operate in parallel. 3. Verification and Polish. The system confirms successful compilation and the absence of sorry , axiom ,and other escape hatches, then performs a quality pass to extract reusable lemmas and reduce proof complexity. As shown in Figure 4, the agents are equipped with a suite of tools implemented via terminal CLI and Model Context Protocols (MCPs). We highlight two that are particularly important to Archon’s effectiveness: 

Ask Informal Agent. When the Lean Agent requires mathematical guidance beyond what the provided informal proof covers, it delegates to an informal agent for natural-language sub-proofs or alternative strategies. In most cases, this is a lightweight Gemini API call for quick reasoning. When the agent encounters a more substantial obstacle, it may invoke Rethlas for deeper, long-horizon reasoning. 

LeanSearch. Our previously published retrieval tool, widely adopted in the Lean community, provides fuzzy search over Mathlib’s theorems and definitions. For Archon, we further improved its retrieval accuracy and updated it to the latest Lean and Mathlib versions. Crucially, LeanSearch enables the agent to reliably determine whether a needed result already exists in Mathlib, allowing it to make well-informed decisions about when to invoke library lemmas and when to formalize from scratch. This capability is essential for producing formalizations that fully leverage existing infrastructure. Other tools include a Lean LSP MCP for compilation diagnostics, web search for retrieving published references, and a memory management system that persists the agent’s architectural reasoning, failed approaches, and learned techniques across context compressions and session restarts. Providing tools alone is not sufficient; the model also requires explicit guidance on when and how to deploy them. This behavioral guidance is encoded in skills , structured instruction files built upon the Lean 4 Skills framework, that shape the agent’s working patterns and corner-case handling to mirror authentic formalization practice. 

3.2.2 Enhancements for Conjecture Formalization 

The version of Archon used for FirstProof Problems 4 and 6 validated the dual-agent architecture: the Plan Agent largely eliminated cases where the Lean Agent stalled or refused to push forward. However, scaling to harder problems revealed two further challenges. First, as mathematical difficulty and project complexity grow, agents occasionally lose track of prior attempts and repeatedly explore the same dead ends, wasting computational resources. Second, as the project enlarges, agents must manage a growing body of informal 8references and can struggle to locate them when needed. We introduce two enhancements, both open-sourced, to address these issues.  

> Memory system and Review Agent.

We shorten the duration of each Lean–Plan iteration and require each agent to log a summary of its session. Several global status documents are maintained across sessions, tracking the overall workflow stage, per-file proving status, and detailed records of local sorry elimination and refactoring work. Additionally, a Review Agent runs at each session boundary to synthesize trends across recent sessions. This multi-session perspective is essential for detecting stalls, which only manifest as patterns over consecutive sessions. While the Review Agent does not alter the formalization itself, it enables the Plan Agent to adjust strategy at the right time and gives human experts a clearer view of progress.  

> Structured prompts and reference management.

We reorganize the agent’s guidance and reference materials into a clear directory structure. During project initialization, human experts prepare paper references (with agent assistance), and the agent adds further references via search. When facing mathematical difficulties, the agent consults the informal agent, then records candidate proof routes in a dedicated location distinct from the original references. Skills and prompts, which govern the agent’s working patterns and conventions, can be customized per project; in our experiments, explicitly instructing the Plan Agent to follow informal reference steps when they are deemed trustworthy significantly reduced time spent on unpromising alternatives. This design also keeps the context clean: agents load only the materials relevant to the current task, avoiding distraction from unrelated information. These design choices play a central role in the full-scale formalization described in Section 5. 

## 4 The Open Problem and the Solution by Rethlas 

With the framework established, we now shift our focus to the target mathematical problem. Section 4.1 introduces the background and Anderson’s open problem. Section 4.2 then presents an overview of the proof generated by Rethlas. Finally, Section 4.3 traces the step-by-step discovery process that led to the proof. 

4.1 Anderson’s open problem 

Let (R, m) be a Noetherian local ring. Recall the following definitions: 1. R is quasi-complete if for every decreasing sequence {An}n≥1 of ideals of R and every integer k ≥ 1, there exists sk such that 

Ask ⊆

 \ 

> n≥1

An



+ mk.

2. R is weakly quasi-complete if the above condition holds for all decreasing sequences with T 

> n≥1

An = 0 ; in this case the condition simplifies to 

Ask ⊆ mk.

These properties arise naturally from the study of topologies on local rings. Quasi-completeness clearly implies weak quasi-completeness, and the implication that every complete local ring is quasi-complete was first proved by Chevalley [11, Lemma 7]. D. D. Anderson posed the following question: 

Problem (D. D. Anderson, [ 8 , Problem 8a]) . Does weak quasi-completeness imply quasi-completeness for Noetherian local rings? 

We tasked Rethlas with exploring both possibilities: whether weak quasi-completeness always implies quasi-completeness, or a counterexample exists. The following theorem, proved by Rethlas and formalized in Lean by Archon, provides a negative answer by constructing such a counterexample. 

Theorem 1. There exists a weakly quasi-complete ring that is not quasi-complete. 9

4.2 Overview of the mathematical proof 

The counterexample discovered by Rethlas and formalized by Archon relies heavily on a technical result from an external source by Jensen [ 27 ], which was located by Matlas. This result is very challenging to uncover without domain expertise and is not obviously related at first glance. A body of research has been developed in this area, studying completions and generic formal fibers; see, for example, [ 18 , 23 , 27 , 33 ]. Nevertheless, Rethlas quickly identified the relevant result and successfully applied it. For a detailed mathematical construction and proof, see Appendix A; we present only a brief sketch here to clarify the logical structure and the role of Jensen’s result. After initial reductions and the application of several lemmas from the related literature, it suffices to construct a ring A whose completion T = bA satisfies the following conditions: A. The generic formal fiber of A, i.e., Spec ( T ⊗A Frac A), is trivial. B. There exists a prime element a ∈ A such that A/aA is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain that is not analytically irreducible (equivalently, its completion with respect to the maximal ideal is not a domain). At this point, Jensen’s result [ 27 , Corollary 2.4] becomes relevant. Jensen completely characterizes, under mild assumptions, when a ring T can be realized as the completion of a local UFD A with trivial generic formal fiber. Setting 

T = C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2 − yz )

and verifying that T satisfies all conditions in Jensen’s theorem yields the desired construction. Since T is not factorial and contains a nonprincipal height-one prime Q, the contraction q := Q ∩ A = ( a) produces a quotient A/aA that is not weakly quasi-complete. 

4.3 Rethlas’ discovery process 

In this section, we present Rethlas’ discovery process, illustrated in Figure 5, which traces the journey from the initial problem stated in Theorem 1 to a complete proof. Broad Search    

> Rethlas' Exploration Trajectory
> Focused Search
> Attack Plan
> Generation
> Plan A Attempt
> Plan C Attempt
> Plan B Attempt Plan D Formulation Proof Completion Natural Language
> Verification
> Failure
> Failure
> Success

Figure 5 Illustration of Rethlas’ exploration trajectory. 

1. Broad search. By searching the original problem statement and its references, Rethlas located the literature that records this problem as an open question, as well as directly relevant technical sources including [ 8, 13 ]. This led to a more tractable reformulation: it suffices to construct a weakly quasi-complete ring that admits a homomorphic image which is not weakly quasi-complete. 2. Focused search. Searching the reformulated problem and related results from the previous step, Rethlas accumulated further technical understanding. During this phase, by searching the query There exists a 10 

weakly quasi-complete local ring with a quotient isomorphic to k[X,Y]_(X,Y). using Matlas, it discovered one of the works that systematically study the relationship between a Noetherian local ring and its completion, with particular attention to the generic formal fiber, namely [ 18 ]. Rethlas noted that this line of research might be useful for constructing the desired counterexample. 3. Attack plan generation. With the knowledge from the search results, Rethlas drafted three decomposition plans for attacking the problem. A. Construct a weakly quasi-complete ring R that surjects onto a known non-weakly-quasi-complete local ring S (ideally S = k[X, Y ](X,Y )) via a square-zero extension or idealization. B. Construct a weakly quasi-complete local domain A using formal fiber control, then select a nonprime ideal I such that the completion of the quotient A/I exhibits an obvious obstruction to weak quasi-completeness. C. Begin with a non-weakly-quasi-complete local ring S and a weakly quasi-complete overring T with maximal ideal M . Form a subring R = S + M of T or a fibered product, and test whether the added 

M -part forces every descending chain in R with zero intersection into powers of the maximal ideal. 4. Attempts of Plans A, B, C and formulation of Plan D. Plans A and C failed after several attempts, yielding no clear progress. During these attempts, continued investigation of works relating a Noetherian local ring 

A to its completion T brought Jensen’s result [ 27 ] to light. Building on this, Rethlas identified a concrete candidate T = C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2 − yz ) and proposed Plan D, which is substantially clearer than Plan B. D. Use Jensen’s corollary to construct a weakly quasi-complete local UFD A whose completion T is not factorial and contains a nonprincipal height-one prime Q; then the contraction q = Q ∩ A = ( a) yields a quotient A/aA that is not weakly quasi-complete. 5. Proof Completion and Verification. Rethlas worked out the remaining proof details and produced a markdown file that clearly states all cited theorems and the logical steps of the argument. The natural language verifier accepted the proof, yielding the final output. Some minor details that a human mathematician would consider negligible but formal verification requires are not fully filled in; see Appendix E.1. 

## 5 Formalization and Verification 

With the informal proof in hand, we now turn to its formalization and verification in Lean 4. The formalization 6,carried out by Archon, translates the complete proof of Anderson’s conjecture into a Lean 4 project grounded in Mathlib, covering the main theorem, all supporting lemmas, and key results drawn from six external papers. The task is non-trivial: beyond routine translation, the formalization requires filling gaps left implicit in the informal argument, implementing underspecified constructions (such as transfinite recursion) in full detail, and adapting proof strategies to the available library infrastructure. Based on interviews with Mathlib contributors, we estimate that an experienced formalization expert produces roughly 150–250 lines of Lean code per day; the 19,000-line codebase produced by Archon thus represents a workload comparable to several person-months of expert effort, completed autonomously in approximately 80 hours runtime. We begin with an overview of the formalization output and its key quantitative and qualitative features (Section 5.1), then discuss lessons learned and limitations observed during the process (Section 5.2). 

5.1 Overview of the formalization result 

The correctness of the formalization is verified at multiple levels. The entire project passes lake build 

without errors. Additionally, we employ Comparator 7, a sandboxed verification tool for Lean proofs, to confirm that the formalized theorem statements match a human-reviewed simplified specification (Appendix ?? ) and that the proof relies only on the standard Lean axioms without introducing any hidden assumptions.  

> 6The complete formalization is open-sourced at https://github.com/frenzymath/Anderson-Conjecture .
> 7https://github.com/leanprover/comparator

11 Anderson/ 19,448             

> Jensen/ 14,530
> CloseUp/ 4,131
> KrullDomain/ 3,491
> Construction/ 1,936
> Adjoin/ 1,639
> (7 files) 3,333
> CompleteDomain/ 1,787
> QuasiCompleteRing/ 949
> (5 files) 2,182
> Figure 6

Structure of the formalization code-base (19,448 lines of Lean 4). 

The complete formalization comprises approximately 19,000 lines of Lean 4 code across 42 files (see Figure 6 for a detailed break-down). The formalization was completed in approximately 80 hours of agent runtime. The computational cost consisted of three Claude Code Max subscriptions ($200/month each), of which each account consumed roughly 70% of its weekly quota during the one-week project. Beyond the proof itself, the formalization required formalizing key results from six external papers—Anderson [ 4], Farley [ 13 ], Jensen [ 27 ], Heitmann [ 23 ], Loepp [ 33 ], and Cheval-ley [ 11 ]—reflecting the scope of a project-level formalization effort. The entire process was fully autonomous: the only human inter-vention consisted of downloading paywalled PDF files that Archon could not retrieve on its own and placing them in the project’s reference directory, after which Archon automatically performed OCR and organized the content into structured Markdown files for its own use. No mathematical judgment was required from the human operator. Beyond these quantitative metrics, the formalization process reveals several mathematical capabilities of Archon worth noting. First, Archon consistently demonstrated the ability to autonomously fill non-trivial gaps 

in the informal proof—arguments that the source text omits or leaves implicit—by supplying complete formal arguments without human input or additional informal context. Second, when an initial proof strategy proved untenable, Archon was able to diagnose its own mathematical errors and carry out a large-scale cross-session refactoring. Third, where the reference proof relied on definitions absent from Mathlib, Archon independently identified alternative proof strategies that bypass missing infrastructure. These observations also suggest a practical mode of human–AI collaboration for formalization. In our experience, a mathematician can guide Archon in much the same way one explains a proof to a graduate student—by indicating key difficulties, pointing out errors, supplying references, and elaborating at specific bottlenecks—without needing to spell out every formal detail. 

5.2 Lessons and Difficulties 

The formalization process surfaced both notable strengths and recurring limitations of the current system. We organize our observations into three parts: notable capabilities (Section 5.2.1), limitations that warrant further development (Section 5.2.2), and a controlled ablation study examining the effect of optional human mathematical guidance (Section 5.2.3). 

5.2.1 Notable capabilities 

We highlight three categories of notable behavior observed during the formalization. Detailed mathematical examples for each are provided in Appendix E.  

> Autonomous gap-filling.

Archon reliably fills gaps that the informal proof leaves implicit, ranging from missing sub-arguments to entire constructions that the source literature describes only schematically. For instance, when the informal proof asserts an isomorphism without proving injectivity, Archon independently constructs the required argument at the coefficient level (Appendix E.1). At a larger scale, the transfinite recursive construction of the local UFD—described in the source papers only as “recursively define {Rα} and take unions at limit ordinals”—required Archon to design a bundled record type, implement well-founded recursion on ordinals, and verify that algebraic invariants propagate through both successor and limit stages (Appendix E.2).  

> Self-diagnosis and cross-session refactoring.

When Archon’s initial approach to the transfinite construction— based on Zorn’s lemma and an unjustified countability assumption—failed, it diagnosed the root cause without human guidance: Zorn’s lemma provides only existence without the fine-grained control the construction demands, and the countability assumption is not valid in ZFC without the Continuum Hypothesis. Archon then 12 carried out a large-scale refactoring across multiple sessions, replacing the approach with explicit well-founded recursion and general cardinal arithmetic (Appendix E.3 and E.4).  

> Discovery of alternative proof strategies.

When the reference proof relies on mathematical infrastructure absent from Mathlib, Archon can sometimes find alternative routes that bypass the gap entirely. In this project, a key lemma originally proved via Krull domain theory—which has no Mathlib formalization—was instead established using Kaplansky’s criterion, a characterization that Archon identified independently and that does not explicitly appear in any of the reference papers used in this project (Appendix E.5). 

5.2.2 Observed limitations 

We also observe several recurring limitations. These are tendencies rather than invariable behaviors—Archon occasionally performs well in each area—but they arose frequently enough to merit discussion.  

> Overthinking in the face of proof difficulties.

When confronted with proof obligations where the informal reference contains gaps or where Mathlib lacks the requisite infrastructure, Archon sometimes spends time deferring the obligation or searching for tangentially related material before committing to a direct attempt. While this behavior does not prevent eventual progress—Archon ultimately completed all obligations in our experiments—it reduces efficiency. We note a mild concern that for substantially more complex projects, such delays could accumulate and become a more serious bottleneck. In practice, providing targeted prompt-level guidance, such as instructing the agent to persist on a specific obligation, noticeably improves throughput. However, rigidly requiring Archon to follow the original proof is not always optimal: as illustrated by its independent discovery of the Kaplansky criterion route (Section E.5), the agent can sometimes identify simpler alternatives on its own. The most effective intervention is for a human formalization expert to provide case-by-case guidance, leveraging their judgment of which proof route is more tractable given the available Mathlib infrastructure.  

> Code quality and Mathlib conventions.

Archon tends to produce proofs that are structurally verbose, relying heavily on have statements that mirror the step-by-step flow of natural-language reasoning. Individual proof blocks often span hundreds of lines without taking advantage of more idiomatic Lean tactics or term-mode constructions. When Archon extracts auxiliary lemmas to manage complexity, the results tend to be direct extractions of subgoals from the proof state—lightly simplified but not generalized into broadly applicable results. The naming conventions and statement styles also remain at a noticeable distance from Mathlib standards: theorem names do not consistently follow dot-notation patterns, and statement formulations sometimes differ from canonical forms. While none of these issues affect correctness, bringing the codebase into alignment with Mathlib conventions for potential upstream contribution would require non-trivial human effort. 

5.2.3 Ablation: effect of human mathematical guidance 

While Archon completed the formalization fully autonomously, we also conducted a controlled experiment to assess whether optional human mathematical input could accelerate the process. At a point where three proof obligations remained open—all related to establishing that a certain intersection of subrings is a UFD (the same technical challenge discussed in Appendix E.5)—we saved a checkpoint of the project state and ran two parallel branches from this divergence point: one in which a human supervisor provided mathematical guidance, and one in which Archon continued without intervention. In the human-guided branch, the supervisor provided a detailed proof blueprint as a Markdown file (reproduced in Appendix D), and instructed Archon to consult it as a reference. The blueprint suggested a proof route via Krull domain theory, following the original argument in Heitmann [ 23 ]. This branch resolved all remaining obligations in a single session, taking 2 hours and 12 minutes from the divergence point. The fully autonomous branch, without the blueprint, required 2 sessions and 3 hours and 43 minutes to complete the proof— approximately 70% more time. To clarify the mathematical role of the human guidance: in the human-guided branch, Archon did not adopt the Krull domain route suggested in the blueprint. Instead, it continued along the Kaplansky criterion approach it had already been developing (Appendix E.5), selectively incorporating from the blueprint only 13 those intermediate observations and commutative-algebra lemmas that were applicable to both proof strategies. The primary effect of the human input was not to redirect the proof strategy, but to supply useful intermediate results that accelerated the agent’s progress along its chosen route. These findings confirm that Archon is capable of completing the formalization independently, while also demonstrating that human mathematical guidance—when provided in the manner one would explain a proof to a graduate student—can meaningfully reduce the time required and steer the agent toward cleaner proof structures. 

## 6 Conclusion 

In this paper, we propose an automated framework that integrates natural language reasoning with formal verification to tackle research-level mathematical problems. The framework consists of two agents. The first is a natural language reasoning agent that mimics the workflow of human mathematicians and is equipped with our mathematical theorem search tool, Matlas. The second is a formal agent equipped with LeanSearch, consisting of two subagents: one responsible for task decomposition and targeted guidance, and the other for executing formalization. Using this framework, we successfully solved an open problem in commutative algebra [ 8] and automatically formalized the proof with essentially no human intervention. During the reasoning process, the success of the informal agent is largely attributed to Matlas, which enables the discovery of relevant theorems from adjacent fields and guides the search toward the correct direction. Meanwhile, the formal agent demonstrates the ability to autonomously fill nontrivial gaps that are omitted or left implicit in the informal proof, without requiring human assistance. Our results highlight several key strengths. For the informal agent, it demonstrates strong capabilities in retrieval, understanding, and the application of deep domain-specific knowledge. In the course of discovering the proof, it explored a related branch connected to the open problem and successfully identified and applied highly technical methods (e.g., Jensen’s paper). Achieving such cross-domain integration would typically require collaboration between experts from different fields. This illustrates the effectiveness of retrieval tools in enabling a level of interdisciplinary reasoning comparable to expert-level discussions. In addition, the agent operates significantly faster than human mathematicians: tasks that would typically require substantial time for an individual mathematician unfamiliar with the relevant literature. The framework also exhibits strong generality. The paradigm of discovering and leveraging knowledge from adjacent fields can be expected to extend to a wide range of mathematical domains and problems. For the formal agent, the framework greatly reduces human labor, requiring only one or two individuals with mathematical background and almost no expertise in formalization. Moreover, human mathematicians can interact with the system in a natural and intuitive way, similar to explaining concepts to students, by highlighting key difficulties, pointing out errors, suggesting references, and elaborating on challenging points, without the need for exhaustive formal detail. Overall, our results demonstrate that, for a genuine open problem in mathematics, informal reasoning agents and formal agents can effectively cooperate: the informal agent generates plausible proofs, while the formal agent formalizes them and fills in missing details. Human involvement is limited to a minimal role, primarily verifying the semantic correctness of statements. This work provides a concrete example of how mathematical research can be substantially automated using AI. 

## Acknowledgement 

This work is supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China grant 2024YFA1014000, the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China (JYB2025XDXM113), and the New Cornerstone Investigator Program. 14 

## References 

[1] Mohammed Abouzaid, Andrew J Blumberg, Martin Hairer, Joe Kileel, Tamara G Kolda, Paul D Nelson, Daniel Spielman, Nikhil Srivastava, Rachel Ward, Shmuel Weinberger, et al. First Proof. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05192, 2026. [2] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. [3] Tudor Achim, Alex Best, Alberto Bietti, Kevin Der, Mathïs Fédérico, Sergei Gukov, Daniel Halpern-Leistner, Kirsten Henningsgard, Yury Kudryashov, Alexander Meiburg, et al. Aristotle: Imo-level automated theorem proving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01346, 2025. [4] Daniel D Anderson. Quasi-complete semilocal rings and modules. In Commutative Algebra: Recent Advances in Commutative Rings, Integer-Valued Polynomials, and Polynomial Functions, pages 25–37. Springer, 2014. [5] Kevin Barreto, Jiwon Kang, Sang-hyun Kim, Vjekoslav Kovač, and Shengtong Zhang. Irrationality of rapidly converging series: a problem of erd \h {o} s and graham. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21442, 2026. [6] Benjamin Breen, Marco Del Tredici, Jacob McCarran, Javier Aspuru Mijares, Weichen Winston Yin, Kfir Sulimany, Jacob M Taylor, Frank HL Koppens, and Dirk Englund. Ax-prover: A deep reasoning agentic framework for theorem proving in mathematics and quantum physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12787, 2025. [7] Jim Bryan, Balázs Elek, Freddie Manners, George Salafatinos, and Ravi Vakil. The motivic class of the space of genus 0 maps to the flag variety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07222, 2026. [8] Paul-Jean Cahen, Marco Fontana, Sophie Frisch, and Sarah Glaz. Open problems in commutative ring theory. In Commutative Algebra: Recent Advances in Commutative Rings, Integer-Valued Polynomials, and Polynomial Functions, pages 353–375. Springer, 2014. [9] Evan Chen, Chris Cummins, Dejan Grubisic, Leopold Haller, Letong Hong, Andranik Kurghinyan, Kenny Lau, Hugh Leather, Seewoo Lee, Aram Markosyan, et al. Fel’s conjecture on syzygies of numerical semigroups. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03716, 2026. [10] Jiangjie Chen, Wenxiang Chen, Jiacheng Du, Jinyi Hu, Zhicheng Jiang, Allan Jie, Xiaoran Jin, Xing Jin, Chenggang Li, Wenlei Shi, et al. Seed-prover 1.5: Mastering undergraduate-level theorem proving via learning from experience. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17260, 2025. [11] Claude Chevalley. On the theory of local rings. Annals of Mathematics, 44(4):690–708, 1943. [12] Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann, Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Marcel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, et al. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the Frontier with Advanced Reasoning, Multimodality, Long Context, and Next Generation Agentic Capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.06261, 2025. [13] Jonathan David Farley. Quasi-completeness and localizations of polynomial domains: A conjecture from “open problems in commutative ring theory”. Bulletin of the Korean Mathematical Society, 53(6):1613–1615, 2016. [14] Tony Feng. Eigenweights for arithmetic hirzebruch proportionality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.23245, 2026. [15] Tony Feng, Junehyuk Jung, Sang-hyun Kim, Carlo Pagano, Sergei Gukov, Chiang-Chiang Tsai, David Woodruff, Adel Javanmard, Aryan Mokhtari, Dawsen Hwang, et al. Aletheia tackles FirstProof autonomously. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.21201, 2026. [16] Tony Feng, Trieu Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Jiwon Kang, Shengtong Zhang, Sang-hyun Kim, Kevin Barreto, Carl Schildkraut, Junehyuk Jung, Jaehyeon Seo, et al. Semi-autonomous mathematics discovery with gemini: A case study on the erd \h {o} s problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.22401, 2026. [17] Tony Feng, Trieu H Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Dawsen Hwang, Yuri Chervonyi, Junehyuk Jung, Joonkyung Lee, Carlo Pagano, Sang-hyun Kim, Federico Pasqualotto, et al. Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.10177, 2026. [18] Sarah M Fleming, Lena Ji, Susan Loepp, Peter M McDonald, Nina Pande, and David Schwein. Completely controlling the dimensions of formal fiber rings at prime ideals of small height. Journal of Commutative Algebra, 11(3):363–388, 2019. 15 

[19] Guoxiong Gao, Haocheng Ju, Jiedong Jiang, Zihan Qin, and Bin Dong. A semantic search engine for mathlib4. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 8001–8013, 2024. [20] Guoxiong Gao, Yutong Wang, Jiedong Jiang, Qi Gao, Zihan Qin, Tianyi Xu, and Bin Dong. Herald: A natural language annotated lean 4 dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10878, 2024. [21] Elliot Glazer, Ege Erdil, Tamay Besiroglu, Diego Chicharro, Evan Chen, Alex Gunning, Caroline Falkman Olsson, Jean-Stanislas Denain, Anson Ho, Emily de Oliveira Santos, et al. Frontiermath: A Benchmark for Evaluating Advanced Mathematical Reasoning in AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04872, 2024. [22] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. DeepSeek-R1 Incentivizes Reasoning in LLMs Through Reinforcement Learning. Nature, 645 (8081):633–638, 2025. [23] Raymond C Heitmann. Characterization of completions of unique factorization domains. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 337(1):379–387, 1993. [24] Yichen Huang and Lin F Yang. Winning Gold at IMO 2025 with a Model-Agnostic Verification-and-Refinement Pipeline. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15855, 2025. [25] Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z Horváth, Goran Žužić, Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Masoom, et al. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement learning. Nature, pages 1–3, 2025. [26] Vasily Ilin. Semi-autonomous formalization of the vlasov-maxwell-landau equilibrium. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.15929, 2026. [27] David Jensen. Completions of ufds with semi-local formal fibers. Communications in Algebra ®, 34(1):347–360, 2006. [28] Jiedong Jiang, Wanyi He, Yuefeng Wang, Guoxiong Gao, Yongle Hu, Jingting Wang, Nailing Guan, Peihao Wu, Chunbo Dai, Liang Xiao, et al. FATE: A Formal Benchmark Series for Frontier Algebra of Multiple Difficulty Levels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02872, 2025. [29] Haocheng Ju and Bin Dong. Ai for mathematics: Progress, challenges, and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.13209, 2026. [30] Lean Community. Comparator: A trustworthy judge for lean proof submissions. https://github.com/ leanprover/comparator , 2025. GitHub repository. [31] Joonkyung Lee and Jaehyeon Seo. Lower bounds for multivariate independence polynomials and their generalisa-tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02450, 2026. [32] Junqi Liu, Zihao Zhou, Zekai Zhu, Marco Dos Santos, Weikun He, Jiawei Liu, Ran Wang, Yunzhou Xie, Junqiao Zhao, Qiufeng Wang, et al. Numina-lean-agent: An open and general agentic reasoning system for formal mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.14027, 2026. [33] S Loepp. Constructing local generic formal fibers. Journal of Algebra, 187(1):16–38, 1997. [34] Math, Inc. Completing the formal proof of higher-dimensional sphere packing. https://math.inc/ sphere-packing , 2026. Blog post. [35] Mistral AI. Leanstral: Open-source foundation for trustworthy vibe-coding. https://mistral.ai/news/ leanstral , March 2026. Blog post. [36] OpenAI. First Proof? Technical report, OpenAI, February 2026. URL https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/ 26177a73-3b75-4828-8c91-e8f1cf27aaa0/oai_first_proof.pdf . OpenAI First Proof submissions. [37] Anand Patel. The simplicity of the hodge bundle. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19052, 2026. [38] Qwen Team. QwQ-32B: Embracing the Power of Reinforcement Learning, March 2025. URL https://qwenlm. github.io/blog/qwq-32b/ .[39] Hanyu Wang, Ruohan Xie, Yutong Wang, Guoxiong Gao, Xintao Yu, and Bin Dong. Aria: An agent for retrieval and iterative auto-formalization via dependency graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04520, 2025. [40] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025. 16 

# Appendix 

## A Mathematical Proof of Anderson’s Conjecture 

In this section, we present the mathematical construction and proof of Anderson’s conjecture as generated and verified by our complete automated pipeline. The original proof, produced by the AI system, has been refactored by human authors solely to improve exposition and clarity, without altering its logical content. 

Definitions and statement of the main theorem 

Let (R, M ) be a Noetherian local ring. Recall the following definitions. 

Definition 2. R is quasi-complete if for every decreasing sequence {An}∞ 

> n=1

of ideals of R and each integer k ≥ 1, there exists sk such that 

Ask ⊆

 ∞\

> n=1

An



+ M k.

Definition 3. R is weakly quasi-complete if for every decreasing sequence {An}∞ 

> n=1

of ideals of R with T∞ 

> n=1

An = 0 and each integer k ≥ 1, there exists sk such that 

Ask ⊆ M k.

Definition 4. R is analytically irreducible if its M -adic completion bR is an integral domain. Quasi-completeness can be viewed as a topological approximation property: every descending chain of ideals eventually becomes arbitrarily close to its intersection in the M -adic topology. The weak variant imposes this condition only for chains whose intersection is zero. The following basic relationships are known. 

Corollary 5. Let (R, M ) be a Noetherian local ring. 1. If R is complete with respect to the M -adic topology, then R is quasi-complete [11, Lemma 7]. 2. If R is quasi-complete, then R is weakly quasi-complete. 3. R is quasi-complete if and only if every homomorphic image R/I (for any proper ideal I) is weakly quasi-complete [4, Theorem 1.3]. 

The main result of this section provides a negative answer to Anderson’s question. 

Theorem 6. There exists a weakly quasi-complete Noetherian local ring that is not quasi-complete. 

Reduction of the problem 

By the third property in Theorem 5, a Noetherian local ring R fails to be quasi-complete if and only if some homomorphic image R/I is not weakly quasi-complete. Consequently, to prove Theorem 6, it suffices to construct a Noetherian local ring A that is weakly quasi-complete yet admits a proper quotient failing weak quasi-completeness. We now recall two external results that reduce this construction to concrete conditions. 

Cited Result 7 (Farley, [ 13 , Proposition 1]) . A Noetherian local integral domain A is weakly quasi-complete if and only if P ∩ A̸ = {0} for every nonzero prime ideal P of bA.17 Equivalently, A is weakly quasi-complete precisely when its generic formal fiber is trivial: the only prime of the completion bA lying over the zero ideal of A is the zero ideal itself. 

Cited Result 8 (Anderson, [ 4, Corollary 2.2]) . A one-dimensional Noetherian local domain is (weakly) quasi-complete if and only if it is analytically irreducible. 

Combining these criteria reduces our task to constructing a Noetherian local domain A satisfying the following two conditions: A. The generic formal fiber of A is trivial, which by Farley’s criterion ensures that A is weakly quasi-complete. B. There exists a prime element a ∈ A such that A/aA is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain that is not analytically irreducible, which by Anderson’s criterion implies that A/aA is not weakly quasi-complete. 

Construction of the complete local domain T

Lemma 9. Let 

T = C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2 − yz ),

and let M = ( x, y, z )T . Then: 1. T is a complete 2-dimensional Cohen–Macaulay local domain with |T | = |T /M | = |C|.2. The height-one prime ideal Q = ( x, y )T is not principal. 

Proof. The ring C[[ x, y, z ]] is a complete regular local domain of dimension 3. The quotient 

T = C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2 − yz )

is isomorphic to the subring C[[ u2, uv, v 2]] ⊆ C[[ u, v ]] via 

x 7 → uv, y 7 → u2, z 7 → v2.

Hence T is a domain. Since x2 − yz is a nonzerodivisor in the regular local ring C[[ x, y, z ]] , the quotient T is a hypersurface and therefore Cohen–Macaulay of dimension 2.Moreover, T /M ∼= C, and a formal power series ring in finitely many variables over the uncountable field C

has the same cardinality as C; thus |T | = |T /M | = |C|.Finally, 

T /Q ∼= C[[ z]] ,

so Q is prime and has height 1. To see that Q is not principal, note that M Q ⊆ M 2, while x, y / ∈ M 2 because the defining relation is quadratic. Hence the images of x and y in Q/M Q are nonzero and linearly independent over T /M ∼= C. Therefore μ(Q) = dim C(Q/M Q ) ≥ 2, so Q is not principal. The two properties of T established above serve distinct roles in the proof. The cardinality condition 

|T | = |T /M | satisfies a hypothesis of Jensen’s construction, which will produce a ring A with trivial generic formal fiber (condition A). The non-principality of Q will be used to verify condition B. 

Construction of the local UFD A

Lemma 10. There exists a 2-dimensional local UFD A such that bA ∼= T and the generic formal fiber of A is local with maximal ideal (0) .18 

Proof. We apply the following external result. 

Cited Result 11 (Jensen, [ 27 , Corollary 2.4]) . Let (T, M ) be a complete local ring with |T /M | = |T |,and let P ∈ Spec T . Then there exists a local UFD A such that bA = T and the generic formal fiber of 

A is local with maximal ideal P if and only if either 1. T is a field or a DVR and P = (0) , or 2. T has depth at least two and satisfies: (a) P is nonmaximal and contains all associated primes of T ;(b) P intersects the prime subring of T trivially; (c) if J ∈ Spec T satisfies ht( J) > depth( TJ ) = 1 , then J ⊆ P .

We apply this with the ring T from Theorem 9 and with P = (0) . The hypotheses hold: 1. T is complete and |T | = |T /M | by Theorem 9. 2. T has depth 2 by Theorem 9. 3. Since T is a domain, its only associated prime is (0) , so P = (0) contains all associated primes. 4. P = (0) is nonmaximal and meets the prime subring trivially. 5. Because T is Cohen–Macaulay, there is no prime J with ht( J) > depth( TJ ) = 1 .Therefore Jensen’s corollary yields a local UFD A with bA ∼= T whose generic formal fiber is local with maximal ideal (0) .

Verification that A is the desired counterexample 

By Theorem 10, the generic formal fiber of A is trivial: the only prime ideal of bA ∼= T contracting to (0) in A

is (0) itself. Hence every nonzero prime ideal of bA has nonzero contraction to A. By Farley’s criterion, A is weakly quasi-complete. This establishes condition A. It remains to verify condition B. Consider the height-one prime Q = ( x, y )T from Theorem 9. Since Q̸ = (0) ,the triviality of the generic formal fiber implies 

q := Q ∩ A̸ = (0) .

Because bA is faithfully flat over A, we have 

1 ≤ ht( q) ≤ ht( Q) = 1 ,

so ht( q) = 1 . As A is a UFD, q = aA for some prime element a ∈ A.We claim that aT is not prime. Indeed, aT ⊆ Q. If aT were prime, then ht (aT ) = 1 , so the inclusion aT ⊆ Q

of height-one prime ideals would force aT = Q, contradicting the fact that Q is not principal. Therefore T /aT is not a domain. Since completion commutes with quotient for Noetherian local rings, 

\A/aA ∼= bA/a bA ∼= T /aT, 

so \A/aA is not a domain. Because a is prime in the domain A, the quotient A/aA is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain. Hence A/aA is not analytically irreducible. By Anderson’s criterion, A/aA is not weakly quasi-complete. This establishes condition B. 

Conclusion 

The ring A is weakly quasi-complete (condition A), but its homomorphic image A/aA is not weakly quasi-complete (condition B). Since quasi-completeness is equivalent to every homomorphic image being weakly quasi-complete, A is not quasi-complete. Thus A is a weakly quasi-complete Noetherian local ring that is not quasi-complete, proving Theorem 6. 19 

## B Raw Output of Rethlas 

In this section, we present the raw output of Rethlas. Only formatting adjustments were made to exhibit the Markdown file in LaTeX. 

# lemma lem:complete_domain_choice ## statement Let \[ T=\mathbb{C}[[x,y,z]]/(x^2-yz), \] and let \(M=(x,y,z)T\). Then: 1. \(T\) is a complete \(2\)-dimensional Cohen-Macaulay local domain. 2. \(|T|=|T/M|=|\mathbb{C}|\). 3. The height-one prime ideal \[ Q=(x,y)T \] is not principal. ## proof The ring \(\mathbb{C}[[x,y,z]]\) is a complete regular local domain of dimension \(3\). The quotient \[ T=\mathbb{C}[[x,y,z]]/(x^2-yz) \] is isomorphic to the subring \(\mathbb{C}[[u^2,uv,v^2]]\subseteq \mathbb{C}[[u,v]]\) via \[ x\mapsto uv,\qquad y\mapsto u^2,\qquad z\mapsto v^2. \] Hence \(T\) is a domain. Since \(x^2-yz\) is a nonzerodivisor in the regular local ring \(\mathbb{C}[[x,y,z]]\), the quotient \(T\) is a hypersurface and therefore Cohen-Macaulay of dimension \(2\). Also \(T/M\cong \mathbb{C}\), and a formal power series ring in finitely many variables over the uncountable field \(\mathbb{C}\) has the same cardinality as \(\mathbb{C}\), so \(|T|=|T/M|=|\mathbb{C}|\). Finally, \[ T/Q \cong \mathbb{C}[[z]], \] so \(Q\) is prime and has height \(1\). To see that \(Q\) is not principal, note that \(MQ\subseteq M^2\), while \(x,y\notin M^2\) because the defining relation is quadratic. Hence the images of \(x\) and \(y\) in \(Q/MQ\) are nonzero and linearly independent over \(T/M\cong\mathbb{C}\). Thus \(\mu(Q)=\dim_{\mathbb{C}}(Q/MQ)\ge 2\), so \(Q\) is not principal. # lemma lem:jensen_special_case ## statement There exists a \(2\)-dimensional local UFD \(A\) such that \(\widehat{A}\cong T\) and 20 

the generic formal fiber of \(A\) is local with maximal ideal \((0)\). ## proof We apply the following external result. Complete cited statement: Corollary 2.4 of Jensen, *Completions of UFDs with Semi-Local Formal Fibers* (paper_id: 

`10.1080/00927870500346321 `, theorem_id: `Corollary 2.4 `, arXiv id: none) states: “Let \((T,M)\) be a complete local ring and \(|T/M|=|T|\). Let \(P\in \operatorname{Spec} T\). Then there exists a local UFD \(A\) such that \(\widehat A=T\) and the generic formal fiber of \(A\) is local with maximal ideal \(P\) iff \(T\) is a field or DVR and \(P=(0)\), or \(T\) has depth at least two and: 1. \(P\) is nonmaximal and contains all associated prime ideals of \(T\); 2. \(P\cap\) the prime subring of \(T\) is \((0)\); 3. if \(J\in \operatorname{Spec}T\) with \(\operatorname{ht}(J)>\operatorname{depth}(T_J) =1\), then \(J\subseteq P\).” We apply this with the ring \(T\) from Lemma \ref{lem:complete_domain_choice} and with \(P=(0)\). The hypotheses hold: 1. \(T\) is complete and \(|T|=|T/M|\) by Lemma \ref{lem:complete_domain_choice}. 2. \(T\) has depth \(2\) by Lemma \ref{lem:complete_domain_choice}. 3. Since \(T\) is a domain, its only associated prime is \((0)\), so \(P=(0)\) contains all associated primes. 4. \(P=(0)\) is nonmaximal and meets the prime subring trivially. 5. Because \(T\) is Cohen-Macaulay, there is no prime \(J\) with \(\operatorname{ht}(J)> \operatorname{depth}(T_J)=1\). Therefore Jensen’s corollary yields a local UFD \(A\) with \(\widehat A\cong T\) whose generic formal fiber is local with maximal ideal \((0)\). # lemma lem:a_is_weak_and_has_bad_quotient ## statement For the ring \(A\) of Lemma \ref{lem:jensen_special_case}, the following hold: 1. \(A\) is weakly quasi-complete. 2. There exists a prime element \(a\in A\) such that \(A/aA\) is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain that is not weakly quasi-complete. ## proof Because the generic formal fiber of \(A\) is local with maximal ideal \((0)\), the only prime ideal of \(\widehat A\cong T\) contracting to \((0)\) is \((0)\) itself. Hence every nonzero prime ideal of \(\widehat A\) has nonzero contraction to \(A\). Now invoke the following external result. Complete cited statement: Proposition 1 of Farley, *Quasi-completeness and localizations of polynomial domains: A conjecture from “Open Problems in Commutative Ring Theory”* (paper_id: `BKMS.b140895 `,21 

theorem_id: `Proposition 1 `, arXiv id: none) states: “A Noetherian local integral domain \(R\) is weakly quasi-complete if and only if \(P\cap R\neq\{0\}\) for each non-zero prime ideal \(P\) of \(\widehat R\), the completion of \(R\).” Since \(A\) is a Noetherian local integral domain and every nonzero prime of \(\widehat A\) meets \(A\) nontrivially, Proposition 1 shows that \(A\) is weakly quasi-complete. Next consider the height-one prime \(Q=(x,y)T\) from Lemma \ref{lem:complete_domain_ choice}. Since \(Q\neq (0)\), the triviality of the generic formal fiber implies \[ q:=Q\cap A \neq (0). \] Because \(\widehat A\) is faithfully flat over \(A\), we have \[ 1 \le \operatorname{ht}(q)\le \operatorname{ht}(Q)=1, \] so \(\operatorname{ht}(q)=1\). As \(A\) is a UFD, \(q=aA\) for some prime element \(a\in A\). We claim that \(aT\) is not prime. Indeed, \(aT\subseteq Q\). If \(aT\) were prime, then \(\operatorname{ht}(aT)=1\), so the inclusion \(aT\subseteq Q\) of height-one prime ideals would force \(aT=Q\), contradicting the fact that \(Q\) is not principal. Therefore \(T/aT\) is not a domain. Since completion commutes with quotient for Noetherian local rings, \[ \widehat{A/aA}\cong \widehat A/a\widehat A \cong T/aT, \] so \(\widehat{A/aA}\) is not a domain. Because \(a\) is prime in the domain \(A\), the quotient \(A/aA\) is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain. Hence \(A/aA\) is not analytically irreducible. Now use the criterion quoted in the problem statement itself: Complete cited statement: Anderson, *Quasi-complete semilocal rings and modules* (paper_id: `Anderson-2014-Chapter `, theorem_id: `Corollary 2.2 `, arXiv id: none): “A one-dimensional Noetherian local domain is (weakly) quasi-complete if and only if it is analytically irreducible.” Since \(A/aA\) is a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain that is not analytically irreducible, it follows that \(A/aA\) is not weakly quasi-complete. # theorem thm:main ## statement Let (R,M) be a Noetherian local ring. R is said to be quasi-complete if for any decreasing sequence {A_n}_{n=1}^ ∞ of ideals of R and each natural number k, there exists a natural number s_k with A_{s_k} ⊆ (∩_{n=1}^ ∞ A_n) + M^k. If this condition holds for any decreasing sequence {A_n}_{n=1}^ ∞ of ideals of R with ∩_{n=1}^ ∞ A_n = 0, then R is called weakly quasi-complete (in which case we actually have A_{s_k} ⊆ M^k). If R is complete, then R is quasi-complete, which implies that R is weakly quasi-complete. 22 

Also, R is quasi-complete if and only if each homomorphic image of R is weakly quasi-complete. The implication "R complete implies R is quasi-complete" was first proved by Chevalley [24, Lemma 7]; see also [4, Theorem 1.3]. Note that a DVR is quasi-complete but need not be complete. More generally, a one-dimensional Noetherian local domain is (weakly) quasi-complete if and only if it is analytically irreducible [4, Corollary 2.2]. References: [24] C. Chevalley, On the theory of local rings, Ann. Math. 44 (1943), 690– 708. [4] D. D. Anderson, Quasi-complete semilocal rings and modules, Commutative Algebra: Recent Advances in Commutative Rings, Integer-Valued Polynomials, and Polynomial Functions, Springer Verlag, New York, 2014. Prove that there exists a weakly quasi-complete ring that is not quasi-complete. ## proof Let \(A\) be the local UFD constructed in Lemma \ref{lem:jensen_special_case}. By Lemma \ref{lem:a_is_weak_and_has_bad_quotient}, \(A\) is weakly quasi-complete. The same lemma also gives a prime element \(a\in A\) such that the homomorphic image \(A/aA\) is not weakly quasi-complete. Finally, the problem statement itself records the equivalence: Complete cited statement: “A Noetherian local ring \(R\) is quasi-complete if and only if each homomorphic image of \(R\) is weakly quasi-complete.” Applying this to \(A\), the quotient \(A/aA\) shows that \(A\) is not quasi-complete. Thus \(A\) is a weakly quasi-complete Noetherian local ring that is not quasi-complete. This proves the required existence statement. 

## C Correspondence between Natural Language Proof and Formalization 

This appendix details the correspondence between the natural-language proof presented in Appendix A and its Lean 4 formalization. All file paths are relative to the project root Anderson/ . We first give the correspondence for the main proof components, then describe how the external results cited in the proof are formalized and where the relevant reference materials reside. 

Main theorem and definitions               

> Informal component Lean declaration File
> Def. of quasi-complete IsQuasiComplete Basic.lean
> Def. of weakly quasi-complete IsWeaklyQuasiComplete Basic.lean
> Def. of analytically irreducible IsAnalyticallyIrreducible Basic.lean
> QC ⇒WQC IsQuasiComplete.isWeaklyQuasiComplete Basic.lean
> Main theorem (Theorem 6) main_theorem Main.lean

23 

Construction of T (Theorem 9) 

Informal component Lean declaration File                                                

> T=C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2−yz )TCompleteDomain/Domain.lean
> Tis a domain T_isDomain CompleteDomain/Domain.lean
> Tis a complete local ring, decomposed as: local ring T_isLocalRing CompleteDomain/LocalRing.lean
> Noetherian T_isNoetherianRing CompleteDomain/LocalRing.lean
> M-adically complete T_isAdicComplete CompleteDomain/LocalRing.lean
> Tis Cohen–Macaulay of dimension 2, decomposed as:
> dim T= 2 T_ringKrullDim CompleteDomain/CompleteDomain.lean
> depth T≥2jensen_T_depth_ge_two Jensen/Jensen.lean
> |T|=|T /M |=|C|jensen_T_card_eq_residue_card Jensen/Jensen.lean
> Q= ( x, y )Tdefined QCompleteDomain/CompleteDomain.lean
> Qis prime, height 1 Q_isPrime ,Q_height_one CompleteDomain/CompleteDomain.lean
> Qis not principal Q_not_isPrincipal CompleteDomain/CompleteDomain.lean

Construction of A (Theorem 10) 

Informal component Lean declaration File 

Jensen Cor. 2.4 applied jensen_special_case Jensen/Jensen.lean 

Trivial generic formal fiber HasTrivialGenericFormalFiber Jensen/Defs.lean 

Verification (conditions (A) and (B)) 

Informal component Lean declaration File 

A is WQC (condition (A)) a_isWeaklyQuasiComplete Main.lean 

Q̸ = (0) Q_ne_bot Main.lean 

q = Q ∩ A, ht( q) = 1 contraction_height_one Main.lean 

q = ( a) for prime a (UFD) ufd_height_one_principal Main.lean 

dim( A/aA ) = 1 quotient_prime_dim_one Main.lean 

A/aA not analytically irred. quotient_not_analytically_irreducible Main.lean 

∃ bad quotient (condition (B)) exists_prime_bad_quotient Main.lean 

Cited results from the literature 

The informal proof relies on several external results. We describe how each is formalized and where the corresponding reference material is stored (in the references/ directory of the project). 

Anderson (2014), Quasi-complete semilocal rings and modules [ 4 ]. Three results from this paper are used in the proof: 

• Corollary 2.2 (one-dimensional local domain: WQC ⇔ analytically irreducible) is formalized as dim1_-wqc_iff_analyticallyIrreducible in QuasiCompleteRing/QuasiCompleteRing.lean .

• Theorem 5, Item 3 (QC ⇔ every proper quotient is WQC) is formalized as isQuasiComplete_iff_-quotients_wqc in QuasiCompleteRing/QuasiCompleteRing.lean .

• Theorem 3 (complete ⇒ quasi-complete), originally due to Chevalley [ 11 ], is formalized as anderson_-complete_isQuasiComplete in QuasiCompleteRing/Complete.lean , following Anderson’s proof. This result appears in the background discussion of Appendix A but is not directly required in the main proof chain. Reference material: references/anderson_2014.md .

Farley (2016), Quasi-completeness and localizations of polynomial domains [ 13 ]. Proposition 1 (Noetherian local domain is WQC iff every nonzero prime of the completion meets the ring nontrivially) is formalized as 24 

isWeaklyQuasiComplete_iff_primes_meet in QuasiCompleteRing/QuasiCompleteRing.lean . This char-acterization is the key tool for establishing condition (A). Reference material: references/farley_2016.md .

Jensen (2006), Completions of UFDs with Semi-Local Formal Fibers [ 27 ]. Corollary 2.4 (existence of a local UFD with prescribed completion and prescribed generic formal fiber) is formalized as jensen_special_case 

in Jensen.lean , which applies the general construction to the specific ring T .The underlying construction (Theorem 2.2 of Jensen, building on Heitmann [ 23 ] and Loepp [ 33 ]) is a transfinite recursive procedure that builds a chain of N-subrings converging to the desired UFD. This is the most technically involved part of the formalization, spanning the entire Jensen/ subdirectory ( ∼15,000 lines). The key modules are: 

• Jensen/Construction/ : the main transfinite recursion and its well-foundedness argument. 

• Jensen/CloseUp/ : the close-up procedure ensuring that finitely generated ideals remain closed under extension. 

• Jensen/KrullDomain/ : UFD verification for intersections of subrings via Kaplansky’s criterion. 

• Jensen/TransfiniteUnion.lean : verification that unions at limit ordinals preserve N-subring proper-ties. 

• Jensen/Adjoin/ : adjoining transcendental elements while maintaining algebraic invariants. 

• Jensen/NSubring.lean : definition of N-subrings and A-extensions. 

• Jensen/Application.lean : application of the general construction to the specific ring T .Reference material: references/jensen_2006.md , references/heitmann_1993.md , references/loepp_-1997.md .

Chevalley (1943), On the theory of local rings [ 11 ]. Chevalley’s result that completeness implies quasi-completeness is formalized as anderson_complete_isQuasiComplete in QuasiCompleteRing/Complete.lean ,following the proof given in Anderson’s generalization (Theorem 3 of [4]). Reference material: references/chevalley_1943.md .

## D Human-Provided Proof Blueprint 

This appendix reproduces the proof blueprint provided to Archon by a human supervisor during the ablation experiment described in Section 5.2.3. This blueprint was not used in the main experiment. The document was supplied as a Markdown file and is presented here with only formatting adjustments. It targets the proof of UniqueFactorizationMonoid S_sub inside the Jensen construction module, proposing a Krull domain approach as an alternative to the Kaplansky criterion route that Archon had been pursuing. 

Mathematical setting 

Let (T, M ) be a complete Noetherian local domain. Let R be an N-subring of T (in particular a local UFD with R ⊆ T ). Let y1, y 2 ∈ R be coprime in the sense that no prime element of R divides both y1 and y2. Let 

x1, x 2 ∈ T be transcendental over R with c = x1y1 + x2y2 where c ∈ R.Define: 

• A1 = R[x1, y −12 ], A2 = R[x2, y −11 ]

• ˜R = A1 ∩ A2

• Ssub = ( ˜R ∩ (T \ M )) −1 ˜R 

> Goal:

Ssub is a UFD. 25 

Formalization suggestions 

One should define the structure IsKrullRing for a ring to mean that it (its image) is the intersection of all valuation subrings of its fraction field that contain it. This is equivalent to: given that K is the fraction field of R, the image of R is the intersection of all valuation subrings of K containing it. The intersection of two Krull rings with the same fraction field is again a Krull ring. Let d be an element of R, and K the fraction field of R. One should define a property of a valuation subring of K as being “generated by d” if it contains R and its maximal ideal is generated by d. In the definition of the structure “valuation subring in K generated by an element” ( ValuationSubring.IsPrincipalGen ), this is a property of a valuation subring of the fraction field of R, requiring that it is a DVR and its maximal ideal is generated by (the image of) some prime element d of R. A valuation subring generated by a prime element 

d is naturally a valuation subring generated by an element. Furthermore, given a prime element d in a Krull domain R, one needs to concretely construct a valuation subring of K that is precisely the localization of R at the prime ideal generated by d. One should first construct this subring, prove (non-trivially, following the supporting lemma at the end of this appendix) that it is a valuation subring, and then upgrade it to a valuation subring. Using these definitions, one can better formalize the following proof of the proposition. 

Proof 

Step 1: Reduction to ˜R. Since the localization of a UFD at any multiplicative set is again a UFD, it suffices to prove that ˜R is a UFD. 

Step 2: A1 and A2 are UFDs and Krull domains. Since R is a UFD and x1, x 2 are transcendental over R,the polynomial rings R[x1] and R[x2] are UFDs. Localizing at y2 and y1 respectively preserves the UFD property, so A1 and A2 are UFDs. Every UFD is a Krull domain: the localization at the prime ideal generated by any prime element p is a DVR, the UFD is the intersection of all such DVRs over its fraction field, and any non-zero element has non-zero valuation in only finitely many of these DVRs. 

Step 3: ˜R is a Krull domain. A finite intersection of Krull domains with the same fraction field is again a Krull domain. The set of essential DVRs for ˜R is obtained by taking the union of the DVR families of A1 and 

A2. The finiteness condition (any element has non-zero valuation in only finitely many DVRs) is inherited. 

Step 4: y1y2 is a product of prime elements in ˜R. Let p be a prime factor of y1 in R. In A1 = R[x1, y −12 ], p

remains prime because adjoining x1 and inverting y2 (coprime to y1) does not affect p. In A2 = R[x2, y −11 ], p

becomes a unit since p | y1 and y1 is inverted. In the Krull domain ˜R, the valuation profile of p is therefore 

1 at exactly one DVR (from the A1 side) and 0 everywhere else. An element with this profile cannot be decomposed further, so p is prime in ˜R. The same argument applies symmetrically to prime factors of y2.

Step 5: ˜R[( y1y2)−1] is a UFD. One computes: 

˜R[( y1y2)−1] = A1[y−11 ] ∩ A2[y−12 ] = R[x1, y −11 , y −12 ] ∩ R[x2, y −11 , y −12 ].

The relation c = x1y1 + x2y2 implies x2 = ( c − x1y1)/y 2, so R[x1, y −11 , y −12 ] = R[x2, y −11 , y −12 ] and hence 

˜R[( y1y2)−1] = R[x1, (y1y2)−1],

which is a localization of the polynomial UFD R[x1] and therefore a UFD. 

Step 6: Applying Nagata’s lemma. We are now left with a classical setup (a variant of Nagata’s Theorem): ˜R

is a Krull domain, y = y1y2 is a product of prime elements in ˜R, and ˜R[y−1] is a UFD. We must prove ˜R is a UFD. To do so, we need only prove the existence and uniqueness of prime factorizations for any element in ˜R.26 Existence of factorization. Take an arbitrary non-zero, non-unit element a ∈ ˜R. Because ˜R[y−1] is a UFD, we can factor a in the localized ring. To pull this factorization back to ˜R, we adjust the powers of the prime factors of y. Since ˜R is a Krull domain, the valuation of a at the DVRs corresponding to the prime factors of 

y is strictly finite (this prevents the pathological case of extracting infinite powers of y). We can perfectly factor out the exact finite powers of these y-primes from a, leaving an element a′ whose prime factorization in 

˜R[y−1] consists entirely of primes coprime to y. We multiply by appropriate powers of y to clear denominators so that this factorization resides entirely in ˜R.Primality of the pulled-back factors. We must verify that these pulled-back factors (let us call an arbitrary one q) remain prime in the base ring ˜R. Suppose for contradiction that q is not prime in ˜R. Since q maps to a prime in ˜R[y−1], its valuation profile in the localized ring has exactly one non-zero entry (which is 1). If q

decomposes in ˜R, its valuation profile over the DVRs of ˜R must split, meaning q would either have valuation 

> 0 at two or more DVRs, or valuation > 1 at a single DVR. However, the set of DVRs of the localization 

˜R[y−1] is exactly the set of DVRs of ˜R minus those corresponding to the prime factors of y. Because we specifically adjusted q such that its valuation at the y-DVRs is 0, the valuation profile of q in ˜R is identical to its valuation profile in ˜R[y−1]: exactly 1 at a single DVR, and 0 everywhere else. An element with v(q) = 1 at a single DVR and 0 elsewhere cannot be decomposed further. Therefore, q is prime in ˜R.

Step 7: Conclusion. Since any element in ˜R can be factored into prime elements, ˜R is a UFD. Finally, because Ssub is a localization of ˜R at the multiplicative set ˜R ∩ (T \ M ), and the localization of a UFD is always a UFD, we conclude that Ssub is a UFD. 

Supporting lemma: localization at a prime element in a Krull domain  

> Lemma.

Let A be a Krull domain and let t ∈ A be a prime element. Then the localization A(t) at the prime ideal (t) is a DVR. Proof. Let P = ( t). The localized ring AP is a local domain with maximal ideal tA P . We show T∞

> n=1

(tn) = (0) 

in A. Suppose for contradiction that a non-zero x ∈ A satisfies x = antn for all n ≥ 1. By the definition of a Krull domain, A is associated with a family of discrete valuations {vi}i∈I on its fraction field such that 

A = {a ∈ K | vi(a) ≥ 0 for all i} and for any non-zero element, only finitely many vi take positive values. Choose a valuation v with v(t) ≥ 1. Then v(x) = v(an) + n · v(t) ≥ n for every n ≥ 1, which forces v(x) = ∞,contradicting x̸ = 0 . Since AP is a local domain with principal maximal ideal and T∞

> n=1

(tA P )n = (0) , it is a DVR. 

## E Detailed Mathematical Examples from the Formalization 

This appendix provides detailed mathematical descriptions of the notable behaviors discussed in Section 5.2. Each subsection corresponds to a specific observation and includes the mathematical context necessary to appreciate it. 

E.1 Autonomous gap-filling in proof details 

Archon demonstrates the ability to autonomously supply non-trivial mathematical arguments that the informal proof omits. We illustrate with two examples. The informal proof asserts that 

T = C[[ x, y, z ]] /(x2 − yz )

is isomorphic to the subring C[[ u2, uv, v 2]] ⊆ C[[ u, v ]] via x 7 → uv , y 7 → u2, z 7 → v2. While these assignments readily define a surjection onto the subring, establishing injectivity requires a separate argument that the informal proof does not provide. Archon resolved this by explicitly constructing a quotient function at the level of power-series coefficients and verifying term-by-term that every element of the kernel is divisible by the generator x2 − yz , thereby completing the injectivity proof without consulting any external reference. 27 A second example concerns the cardinality identity |T | = |T / m| = |C|, which the informal proof states without elaboration. This identity is not trivial: for a power-series ring k[[ x1, . . . , x n]] , one has |k[[ x1, . . . , x n]] | = |k|ℵ0 ,and κℵ0 = κ does not hold for a general infinite cardinal κ. Archon correctly identified that the identity relies on the special property of the continuum c = 2 ℵ0 , namely cℵ0 = (2 ℵ0 )ℵ0 = 2 ℵ0·ℵ 0 = 2 ℵ0 = c, and applied the corresponding Mathlib lemma to close the gap. 

E.2 Handling underspecified transfinite constructions 

The construction of the local UFD A with prescribed completion relies on a transfinite recursive procedure due to Jensen [ 27 ], building on earlier work of Loepp [ 33 ] and Heitmann [ 23 ]. The source papers describe this construction at a high level—stating that one should “recursively define {Rα}α∈V ” and “take unions at limit ordinals”—but leave the bookkeeping details to the reader. Formalizing such a construction in Lean 4 requires making every aspect of the recursion explicit: the data carried at each step, the well-foundedness argument, the propagation of algebraic invariants through successor and limit stages, and the precise cardinality bounds at each level. Archon addressed this challenge by designing a bundled record type that packages each stage of the recursion together with its predecessor, the extension relation, cardinality bounds, and closure properties. It implemented the recursion via well-founded recursion on ordinals, with explicit tracking of the bound max (ℵ0, |{ γ ≤ α}| )

at each level. The limit-ordinal case was handled through a dedicated module verifying that unions of chains of N-subrings preserve the UFD property, prime extension conditions, and cardinality constraints. In effect, Archon successfully decomposed a monolithic transfinite argument into modular, independently verifiable algebraic components—isolating all technical commutative-algebra steps from the inductive scaffolding—and then assembled them into a complete formal proof. Arriving at this final architecture was itself a non-trivial process: Archon’s initial attempt relied on an incorrect proof strategy, which it diagnosed and corrected through a large-scale refactoring spanning multiple sessions (Appendices E.3 and E.4). 

E.3 Self-diagnosis of mathematical errors 

In its initial attempt at the transfinite construction, Archon employed Zorn’s lemma to produce a maximal element rather than carrying out the explicit transfinite recursion required by the proof. Additionally, it conflated “cardinality strictly less than the continuum” with “countable”—an identification that is valid under the Continuum Hypothesis but not provable in ZFC alone. These errors caused downstream algebraic steps to fail: the necessary cardinality bounds could not be established, and the closure properties required at limit stages did not hold. Notably, the source papers do not explicitly warn against these pitfalls. Archon identified the root cause of the failures through its own diagnostic process: it recognized that Zorn’s lemma yields only existence without the fine-grained control over intermediate stages that the construction demands, and that the countability assumption was unjustified in the absence of the Continuum Hypothesis. This self-diagnosis was carried out without human guidance and led directly to the correct reformulation described below. 

E.4 Cross-session architectural refactoring 

Upon recognizing the errors described in Appendix E.3, Archon undertook a large-scale refactoring of the transfinite construction, replacing the Zorn-based approach with an explicit well-founded recursion and revising all cardinality arguments to use general cardinal arithmetic in place of countability assumptions. This refactoring spanned multiple agent sessions—requiring the agent to maintain a coherent understanding of the overall proof architecture across context boundaries—and involved restructuring interdependent files throughout the Jensen construction module. 

E.5 Discovery of alternative proof strategies 

A key technical lemma in the construction—corresponding to Lemma 4 of Heitmann [ 23 ]—establishes that a certain intersection of subrings is a UFD. The original proof proceeds by showing that the intersection is a Krull domain and then appealing to the classification of height-one primes. However, Mathlib does not 28 currently provide a formalized definition of Krull domains, and faithfully following the original argument would have required Archon to develop substantial additional infrastructure, including the characterization of Krull domains and the theory of divisorial ideals. Instead, Archon independently identified and applied Kaplansky’s criterion—which characterizes UFDs as integral domains in which every nonzero prime ideal contains a prime element—to establish the result directly. This alternative route, which does not appear in any of the reference papers provided to the agent, bypasses the need for Krull domain theory entirely and yields a more concise formalization. This episode illustrates Archon’s capacity to adapt its proof strategy to the available library support, rather than rigidly following the structure of the informal argument. 

## F Statement Verification via Comparator 

As described in Section 5.1, we verify the correctness of the formalization at two levels. First, the entire project passes lake build , confirming that all proof obligations are discharged. Second, we use Comparator [ 30 ] to confirm that the theorem proved in the full project matches a short, human-readable specification and relies only on the standard Lean axioms. The specification file, Challenge.lean , is reproduced below. It contains only the definitions of quasi-completeness and weak quasi-completeness, together with the statement of the main theorem. A human reviewer can verify the semantic correctness of these 30 lines without any knowledge of the proof or the rest of the codebase. Comparator then automatically checks that the main_theorem declaration in the full project proves exactly this statement, with no hidden axioms.                                                                   

> import Mathlib.Algebra.Algebra.Operations import Mathlib.RingTheory.LocalRing.MaximalIdeal.Defs import Mathlib.RingTheory.Noetherian.Defs variable (R : Type*) [CommRing R] [IsLocalRing R] /-- A local ring `R`is quasi-complete if for any antitone sequence of ideals `A : N→Ideal R `and each `k : N`, there exists `s`
> such that `A s ≤(⊓n, A n) ⊔(IsLocalRing.maximalIdeal R) ^ k `.This is Definition 1.1 of Anderson (2014). -/ def IsQuasiComplete : Prop :=
> ∀(A : N→Ideal R), Antitone A →
> ∀(k : N), ∃s, A s ≤(⊓n, A n) ⊔(IsLocalRing.maximalIdeal R) ^ k /-- A local ring `R`is weakly quasi-complete if for any antitone sequence of ideals `A : N→Ideal R `with `⊓n, A n = ⊥`and each `k : N`, there exists `s`such that
> `A s ≤(IsLocalRing.maximalIdeal R) ^ k `. -/ def IsWeaklyQuasiComplete : Prop :=
> ∀(A : N→Ideal R), Antitone A →(⊓n, A n) = ⊥→
> ∀(k : N), ∃s, A s ≤(IsLocalRing.maximalIdeal R) ^ k /-- **Main Theorem**: There exists a weakly quasi-complete Noetherian local ring that is not quasi-complete. -/ theorem main_theorem :
> ∃(R : Type) (_ : CommRing R) (_ : IsLocalRing R) (_ : IsNoetherianRing R), IsWeaklyQuasiComplete R ∧¬IsQuasiComplete R := by sorry

The sorry in this file is intentional: it marks an obligation the full project must discharge. Comparator verifies that the project’s main_theorem fills this sorry with a complete proof, matching the statement exactly.