Title: SEAM: Global consistency beyond local accuracy in scientific machine learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.05702v1

Published Time: Fri, 07 Aug 2026 00:38:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
# SEAM: Global consistency beyond local accuracy in scientific machine learning 

## Gnankan Landry Regis N’guessan a,b,c , Bum Jun Kim d,∗

> a

Axiom Research Group 

> b

Department of Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, The Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology, 404 Nganana, Kikwe, Arumeru, P.O. Box 447, Arusha, 23311, Tanzania 

> c

African Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Research and Innovation Centre, KN 3 Road, Gasharu Cell, Kicukiro Sector, Kicukiro District, Kigali, Rwanda 

> d

Graduate School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8656, Japan 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :scientific machine learning cellular sheaves explanation-admissibility obstruction-guided diagnosis identifiability model monitoring 

A B S T R A C T 

Scientific machine learning commonly validates models at the level of a subdomain, a benchmark split, or an explanation for one prediction. Yet such local checks cannot establish whether the resulting explanations can be assembled into one globally admissible explanation. We introduce Scientific Explanation-Admissibility Machines (SEAM), a generator-agnostic framework that makes this local-to-global consistency question computable across regions, sensors, regimes, and model components. The finite explanation-sheaf instantiation SEAM-Ω represents each region by a structured explanation with state, closure, and observation channels together with optional contract metadata; compares neighboring explanations on their overlaps; and converts disagreement into a channel-resolved obstruction. This obstruction locates inconsistency and tests competing declared accounts by restricting each repair to the revisions that one account permits. Exact feasibility refutes or retains an account; when exact repair is unavailable, residual-aware regularized records provide a separately labeled empirical attribution. The framework also separates inconsistency from non-identifiability and monitors learned generators under distribution shift. We establish theorems for minimum-cost intervention and conservation-contract detectability, together with companion results for identifiability and closure recoverability. Across nineteen experiments involving synthetic partial differential equation systems; out-of-distribution Fourier neural operator (FNO) monitoring; four open datasets spanning traffic, hydrology, air quality, and electric power; and synthetic financial and industrial systems, SEAM detects incompatible explanations even when local predictions are accurate, and attributes failures to specific channels and overlaps. SEAM adds a global explanation-consistency audit to existing solvers and learning models, testing whether their local explanations form a coherent scientific account. 

## 1. Introduction 

Scientific models, whether physics-based or data-driven, are commonly judged by what happens inside one region of a problem. For example, a computational fluid dynamics solver is validated on a subdomain where reference data are available. A neural operator is evaluated on a benchmark split. A regional regression model is tested on a held-out fold of the local time series. Each such local assessment is made without testing whether the same system’s explanations remain consistent across neighboring regions, different sensors, adjacent regimes, or solver interfaces. These local checks therefore do not establish whether explanations from different regions form a coherent account of the full system. Those explanations must agree across regimes, scales, sensors, boundary interfaces, and modeling assumptions. A family of individually plausible explanations can be scientifically inadmissible: Every piece looks correct, while the whole cannot be glued into a coherent account. The same pattern appears in several routine scientific workflows. Two regional partial differential equation (PDE) solvers can independently pass local residual tests yet disagree at their shared boundary. Two seasonal demand models can fit their respective seasons yet contradict each other at the transition. An industrial monitoring system can have one zone whose drifted sensors lead its regional model to infer a source term that a neighboring zone’s cleaner sensors contradict. A learned neural operator can score well on in-distribution test sets yet produce explanations that no finite-difference solver could ever produce. The central 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

rnguessan@aimsric.org (G.L.R. N’guessan); bumjun.kim@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp (B.J. Kim) 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 1 of 43 arXiv:2608.05702v1 [cs.LG] 6 Aug 2026 Global consistency beyond local accuracy GENERATE         

> one record per region
> all local checks pass
> RESTRICT → OBSTRUCT
> compare on the overlap
> globally inadmissible
> DIAGNOSE
> 𝜔 split by channel
> closure dominates
> INTERVENE
> which account survives?
> one account survives
> 𝑈 1𝑈 2𝑈 3
> 𝑢
> 𝑐
> 𝑜
> 𝑢
> 𝑐
> 𝑜
> 𝑢
> 𝑐
> 𝑜
> 𝑈 1𝑈 2𝑈 1⋂𝑈 2
> 𝜌 𝜌
> 𝑢 𝑢
> 𝑐 𝑐
> 𝑜 𝑜

𝜔 ≠ 0 

𝜔                    

> 𝑢 𝑐 𝑜
> PERMITTED VERDICT
> 𝑢 𝑐 𝑜 drifted
> sensors
> 𝑢 𝑐 𝑜 missing
> physics
> 𝑢 𝑐 𝑜 interface
> calibration
> EXPLANATIO N CHANNELS + optional contract metadata 𝜖 EXTENSIO NS
> state 𝑢
> predicted field
> closure 𝑐
> hidden physics
> observation 𝑜
> sensor record
> Identify
> unresolved directions
> Monitor
> 𝜔(𝑡) under shift

Figure 1: Overview of a SEAM audit, read from left to right. Each region 𝑈 𝑖 of the cover carries one structured explanation record, emitted by its own backend and partitioned into the state, closure, and observation channels 𝑢 , 𝑐 , and 𝑜 , together with optional contract metadata 𝜖 ; every record passes its own local check. Restriction compares two records on the overlap, and the disagreement that survives is the obstruction 𝜔 ≠ 0, so the family is globally inadmissible, although no local check failed. Diagnosis splits 𝜔 by channel and localizes the defect, here to the closure channel. Intervention states the drifted-sensor, missing-physics, and interface-calibration accounts as budgets that name the revisions each one permits, and only the account whose permitted revisions remove the entire obstruction survives. The Identify and Monitor extensions record unresolved admissible directions and track 𝜔 (𝑡 ) under shift. The figure is schematic. 

operational problem is therefore to determine when local scientific explanations can be assembled into one globally admissible explanation and, when assembly fails, how to diagnose the incompatibility and which repairs are feasible. Answering the second half of that question is a hypothesis-testing problem rather than a scoring problem. Consider three neighboring zones of a monitored system whose regional models disagree on their shared overlaps. A practitioner facing that disagreement is rarely short of candidate explanations; the difficulty is that several explanations are available at once, and each one is consistent with every measurement taken so far. One account holds that the sensors feeding one zone have drifted, so the predicted states are right and the readings are wrong. A competing account holds that the sensors are sound, and the assumed physics of that zone omits a source term, so the readings are right and the closure is wrong. A third account holds that all three zones are individually sound and were merely calibrated on data that never constrained their common interfaces. Each account is a scientific hypothesis about the cause of the disagreement, and no regional residual or held-out score distinguishes these hypotheses, because each of those quantities is computed inside a single zone, whereas the accounts differ in their assertions about the interface between zones. The Scientific Explanation-Admissibility Machines (SEAM) framework separates such accounts by making each account computable. A hypothesis about the cause of a disagreement is at the same time a statement about which parts of the explanations one is prepared to revise, and the framework formalizes the hypothesis through that statement: The drifted-sensor account permits revision of the sensor readings alone, the missing-physics account permits revision of the assumed closure alone, and the interface-calibration account permits revision of the predicted states. Confining a repair to the revisions that one hypothesis permits makes the hypothesis testable. Either some permitted revision removes the entire disagreement, in which case the hypothesis survives and carries a price, namely the cost of the cheapest revision that works; or no permitted revision removes that disagreement, in which case the overlap evidence refutes the hypothesis, and the irreducible remainder measures how badly that hypothesis fails. Costs quantify the repair burden within each surviving account; those costs are not used to rank an unrestricted repair against a more specific account. The test is auditable because the permitted revisions, cost metric, and remainder are all recorded. Figure 1 traces one such audit end to end, from the regional records through the overlap comparison and the channel-wise diagnosis to the single surviving account. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 2 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

A catalog of specific hypotheses can also fail as a whole, when every proper budget is refuted and only unrestricted revision of everything at once restores agreement. SEAM then records the attribution as unresolved instead of treating the unrestricted fallback as a causal account. The identifiability analysis separately records explanation directions that satisfy every overlap constraint and yet leave no trace in the current observations. Current scientific machine learning toolchains address important parts of this problem. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) embed PDE residuals in training losses (Raissi, Perdikaris and Karniadakis, 2019), whereas universal differential equations place trainable components inside differential-equation models (Rackauckas, Ma, Martensen, Warner, Zubov, Supekar, Skinner and Ramadhan, 2020). Neural operators learn maps between input and solution function spaces (Kovachki, Li, Liu, Azizzadenesheli, Bhattacharya, Stuart and Anandkumar, 2023; Lu, Jin, Pang, Zhang and Karniadakis, 2021). Domain-decomposed PINN variants are important exceptions to the single-domain pattern: Conservative PINNs (cPINNs) and extended PINNs (XPINNs) impose solution or flux compatibility at subdomain interfaces, while finite-basis PINNs (FBPINNs) combine networks supported on overlapping subdomains (Jagtap, Kharazmi and Karniadakis, 2020; Jagtap and Karniadakis, 2021; Moseley, Markham and Nissen-Meyer, 2023). The cPINN and XPINN formulations also support distributed execution on central processing units (CPUs) and graphics processing units (GPUs), as implemented by Shukla, Jagtap and Karniadakis (2021). Domain-decomposed PINNs construct coupled PDE solutions, and knowledge-integration surveys organize mechanisms for incorporating scientific knowledge into learning (Willard, Jia, Xu, Steinbach and Kumar, 2023). SEAM complements these approaches by auditing the compatibility of the structured regional records that their generators emit and by testing and comparing admissibility-restoring hypotheses. Relative to interface-residual and sheaf-consistency methods, SEAM integrates named scientific channels with residual-aware budgeted hypothesis evaluation, identifiability, and streaming monitoring. 

1.1. Explanation-admissibility and SEAM 

We treat explanation-admissibility as a local-to-global problem in the sense of sheaf theory (Curry, 2014; Ghrist, 2014; Robinson, 2014). A family of structured local explanations is admissible when neighboring restrictions agree on every overlap. SEAM-Ω stacks the regional records into 𝑠 ∈ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), assembles the restriction maps into a coboundary matrix 𝐷 , and reports the resulting defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 by channel and overlap. Section 3 gives the formal construction, and Appendix A collects the symbols used throughout. The SEAM paradigm has five stages: Generate, Restrict, Obstruct, Diagnose, and Intervene. An identifiability extension records what the current observations cannot determine, while a monitoring extension tracks 𝜔 under streaming inputs. Throughout this paper, a backend is an implementation of a local generator 𝐺 𝑖 , such as an analytic rule, a finite-volume solver, a regression model, or a learned operator. Once the backend output has been mapped to the common channel schema, the downstream SEAM audit is unchanged. 

SEAM-Ω. SEAM-Ω instantiates this paradigm with a finite explanation sheaf 𝐹 . The stalks of 𝐹 carry three primary diagnostic channels for the state 𝑢 , closure 𝑐 , and observation 𝑜 , with an optional contract-metadata block 𝜖 . The restriction maps are hand-crafted linear maps to overlap stalks, the coboundary is the matrix 𝐷 assembled from those restrictions, and the admissibility defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 is computed in closed form. The central object of SEAM-Ω is the 1-cochain 𝜔 on the overlaps, whose decomposition and budgeted preimages define the diagnostic beyond any individual predicted state or learned residual. The channel decomposition localizes disagreement in predicted states, hidden physics, or sensor records; optional contract metadata can be audited when an application supplies a nonzero restriction for that metadata block. For a declared intervention projector 𝑃 , exact-hard repair is feasible when the defect lies in the range of the restricted coboundary, 𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 ); a feasible minimum-cost repair prices a surviving hypothesis, whereas an infeasible budget is reported with its irreducible residual. Regularized-soft records provide a separate empirical attribution used when the single-channel hard problems cannot fit the full defect. The blind admissible subspace  = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 records admissible directions invisible to the current observations, and 𝜔 (𝑡 ) supplies the streaming monitoring signal. 

1.2. Contributions and paper organization 

The paper makes four contributions. 

Contribution 1: explanation-admissibility as a new scientific object. Explanation-admissibility is the local-to-global gluing of structured local explanations, a scientific object distinct from local accuracy and residual satisfaction.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 3 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Contribution 2: the SEAM paradigm. The five-stage pipeline sketched above, together with identifiability and monitoring extensions, defines a reusable design pattern for scientific systems that report whether explanations can be globally assembled. 

Contribution 3: the finite explanation-sheaf instantiation SEAM-Ω. We give a concrete finite-dimensional linear instantiation of the paradigm using vector-space stalks and block-diagonal linear restrictions on the 1-skeleton of the cover’s nerve. This instantiation yields two central theorems on minimum-cost budgeted intervention and conservation-contract detectability, with an identifiability proposition and a closure-recovery corollary. 

Contribution 4: computational evidence. Nineteen experiments across synthetic PDE systems and six application domains evaluate the framework. Reporting for stochastic and deterministic experiments follows the aggregate run protocol documented in Appendix E.1. The experiments evaluate local–global disagreement, closure recovery, exact-hard and regularized-soft intervention records, identifiability, backend interoperability, cross-domain consistency, and learned-generator monitoring. Section 9 reports the complete numerical outcomes. 

Paper organization. Section 2 develops the SEAM paradigm at a level abstracted from any one instantiation. Section 3 specializes to SEAM-Ω by introducing finite explanation sheaves over the 1-skeleton of a cover’s nerve, with structured stalks and the channel-decomposed coboundary. Section 4 develops obstruction-guided diagnosis, the channel decomposition of 𝜔 , and the budgeted intervention problem. Section 5 formalizes identifiability. Section 6 extends the diagnostic to streaming monitoring of learned generators. Section 7 states the finite-dimensional result suite with explicit assumptions; detailed proofs are consolidated in Appendix B. Section 8 gives the algorithms and the computational workflow of SEAM-Ω. Section 9 reports nineteen experiments organized into eight groups aligned with the scientific claims that each group evaluates. Section 10 compares SEAM with existing methods. Section 11 discusses the design choices, interpretation guide, and relationship between the paradigm and the SEAM-Ω instantiation. The appendices consolidate notation, proofs, numerical details, the conservation-theoretic SEAM (CT-SEAM) backend, experimental protocols, data provenance, and robustness checks. 

## 2. The SEAM paradigm 

This section presents SEAM as a reusable local-to-global design principle. 

2.1. From local explanations to global admissibility 

In SEAM, a scientific explanation is a structured regional object that records why a model produces its output. In a PDE solver, the explanation includes the predicted state 𝑢 , the assumed source or closure 𝑐 , the observations 𝑜 

used for calibration, and optional contract metadata 𝜖 , such as conservation-repair magnitudes. The metadata block may be zero-dimensional and is not an intervention budget. In a tabular regression model, the explanation includes the predicted output, residual statistics, sufficient statistics of the input distribution, and auxiliary information needed to interpret the prediction scientifically. The defining property that distinguishes a scientific explanation from a prediction is that explanations from neighboring regions must be jointly assertable. If the explanation on region 𝑈 𝑖 asserts that the local state is 𝑢 𝑖 and the closure is 𝑐 𝑖 , and the explanation on region 𝑈 𝑗 makes the analogous assertion, then, on the overlap 𝑈 𝑖 ∩ 𝑈 𝑗 , those two assertions must agree as statements about the same physical quantity. Locally, each assertion may be plausible, internally consistent, and well supported by data. Jointly, the two assertions may be incompatible, because the evidence that certifies each assertion is confined to the region on which that evidence was produced. A regional residual, a held-out score, or a goodness-of-fit statistic on 𝑈 𝑖 constrains the explanation 𝑒 𝑖 only through quantities visible inside 𝑈 𝑖 ,typically admitting an entire family of explanations that pass equally well without ever referring to 𝑒 𝑗 . Each generator is thus free to select a different member of its own locally plausible family, so agreement on 𝑈 𝑖 ∩ 𝑈 𝑗 is a further, joint requirement that no amount of local validation tests. Local plausibility is a property of the individual explanations, whereas admissibility is a property of the family. Figure 2 contrasts a family of highly accurate regional models that disagree on their overlaps with a rougher family that agrees on every overlap. This phenomenon is generic. Four mechanisms produce such joint incompatibility. We refer to these mechanisms as M1–M4 throughout:   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 4 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Independent local models 

> excellent local fit separately trained

Region 𝑈 1

𝑅 21 = 0 .999 

Region 𝑈 2

𝑅 22 = 0 .999 

Region 𝑈 3

𝑅 23 = 0 .999        

> ‖‖𝜔 12 ‖‖>0‖‖𝜔 23 ‖‖>0
> Global verdict
> Inadmissible
> ‖𝜔 ‖>0

Shared global generator 

> rougher local fit one coherent source

Region 𝑈 1

𝑅 21 = 0 .85 

Region 𝑈 2

𝑅 22 = 0 .85 

Region 𝑈 3

𝑅 23 = 0 .85           

> ‖‖𝜔 12 ‖‖= 0 ‖‖𝜔 23 ‖‖= 0
> Global verdict
> Admissible
> ‖𝜔 ‖= 0
> Figure 2: Local accuracy and global admissibility are orthogonal. The top row shows a schematic family of three locally trained models in which each model achieves high local accuracy but disagrees on overlaps, so the family is globally inadmissible. The bottom row shows three deliberately rougher local fits with 𝑅 2
> 𝑖 = 0 .85 that share a single global generator and agree exactly on overlaps: ‖𝜔 ‖= 0 .

Mechanism M1: independent regional construction. Regional models specified without reference to one another agree with their own local evidence and need not agree with each other on an overlap. Two PDE solvers with independently chosen meshes, time steps, or numerical fluxes are both convergent in their interiors, yet their boundary fluxes do not exactly cancel on the overlap, producing an asymptotically vanishing but operationally measurable disagreement. When the regional specifications themselves differ, as with independently calibrated amplitudes or coefficients, the disagreement persists under refinement. The analogous coupling problem is central to co-simulation, where independently implemented simulator units exchange interface variables at communication points (Gomes, Thule, Broman, Larsen and Vangheluwe, 2018). 

Mechanism M2: regime non-stationarity. Two seasonal time-series models, each accurate within its season, fit different autoregressive coefficients or different residual volatilities. At the inter-season transition, both models extrapolate, and the two extrapolations disagree by a magnitude unrelated to either model’s in-regime error. 

Mechanism M3: sensor–physics conflict. A subset of sensor streams is corrupted, drifted, or biased. A regional model that relies on the affected sensors infers the physics needed to fit those streams. A neighboring model fits cleaner sensors, inferring different physics. The disagreement appears as inconsistency between the two regional closures, even though both models are locally calibrated. 

Mechanism M4: learned-generator distribution shift. A neural operator trained on a distribution of inputs is evaluated on a covariate-shifted input. Each region of the new input may remain close to inputs the operator has seen, while the joint output across regions is no longer on the operator’s learned manifold. The local predictions are still well-formed and locally plausible; the global assembly is not. Together, these mechanisms expose the cross-region consistency gap that SEAM audits, and the same mechanisms organize the evaluation: Mechanism M1 is realized by the independently constructed regional models of Section 9.2, M2 by the seasonal-regime studies of Section 9.7, M3 by the sensor-corruption study of Section 9.4, and M4 by the neural-operator monitoring study of Section 9.8. The four cases listed in Section 1 instantiate M1–M4 in that order. 

2.2. The five-stage paradigm and its extensions 

We define SEAM as a five-stage data flow with identifiability and monitoring extensions, shown in Figure 3. 

Definition 2.1 (SEAM paradigm) . A SEAM system consists of the following five stages: 

Generate. A family of local generators {𝐺 𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 produces, for each region 𝑈 𝑖 of a finite cover  of the problem domain, a structured local explanation 𝑒 𝑖 .

Restrict. For each overlap 𝑈 𝑖 ∩ 𝑈 𝑗 , a restriction map 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 extracts from 𝑒 𝑖 the object that must be compared on the overlap. The object can be a state value, a closure parameter, a posterior mean, a sensor mean, or an admissibility flag.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 5 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Generate 

{𝐺 𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 

Restrict 

𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 

Obstruct 

𝜔 

Diagnose 

report 

Intervene 

repair 

Identify 

unresolved 

Monitor 

𝜔 (𝑡 )    

> Figure 3: The SEAM paradigm. The five core stages in the top row take a family of local generators through restriction, obstruction, diagnosis, and budgeted intervention. The Identify extension records unresolved admissible directions, and the Monitor extension reads 𝜔 as a stream. SEAM-Ωinstantiates these stages with finite cellular sheaves.

Obstruct. The disagreement between 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 (𝑒 𝑖 ) and 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 (𝑒 𝑗 ) on every overlap is assembled into an obstruction object 𝜔 .

Diagnose. The obstruction is summarized using the diagnostic attributes exposed by the chosen instantiation, producing a report that localizes or qualifies the inadmissibility. 

Intervene. A family of allowable intervention budgets is considered. Each budget states one scientific hypothesis about the cause of the obstruction by declaring the revisions that the hypothesis permits. For each budget, the system tests whether the corresponding repair problem can eliminate the obstruction. Feasible hard repairs are retained by the verdict; infeasible budgets contribute residual or diagnostic information declared by the chosen instantiation. Two further extensions are part of the paradigm: 

Identify. An identifiability analyzer determines which parts of the admissible explanation object remain unresolved by current observations. 

Monitor. A SEAM system is also expected to support streaming evaluation of 𝜔 (𝑡 ) for a fixed family of local generators applied to streaming inputs. Definition 2.1 leaves the mathematical type of 𝑒 𝑖 , 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 , and 𝜔 open. Four conditions suffice for an instantiation to realize this abstract definition. Each 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 must be well-defined for the local explanation object used by the instantiation. The equation 𝜔 = 0 must provide a notion of admissibility, and the intervention problem must provide a notion of cost. Finally, the instantiation must expose the diagnostic attributes needed to interpret 𝜔 . The finite explanation-sheaf instantiation of Section 3 fulfills these requirements with vector-space stalks, a named channel decomposition, and linear repair equations. 

2.3. Explanation-admissibility 

The central object of SEAM is explanation-admissibility. 

Definition 2.2 (Explanation-admissibility) . A family of local explanations (𝑒 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 on a cover  is globally admissible if, for every overlap (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 ,

𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 (𝑒 𝑖 ) = 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 (𝑒 𝑗 ).

Equivalently, the obstruction object of the family vanishes: 𝜔 = 0 .In cellular-sheaf terms, admissibility is the global-section condition. The term emphasizes its scientific interpretation: Neighboring explanations make mutually compatible claims on every overlap. Together with admissibility, the following three definitions specify how a SEAM instantiation represents the obstruction diagnostically, delimits allowable repairs, and converts repair feasibility and cost information into a scientific verdict. 

Definition 2.3 (Diagnostic decomposition) . The obstruction object 𝜔 is reported together with diagnostic attributes exposed by the chosen SEAM instantiation. These attributes may be named channels, regions, uncertainty components,   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 6 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

status fields, or other interpretable summaries. In SEAM-Ω, the attributes are the three primary channels and the optional contract-metadata channel introduced in Section 3.2. 

Definition 2.4 (Intervention budget) . An intervention budget is a declared class of allowable repairs together with its cost convention and feasibility test. A hard budget is feasible for 𝜔 if some allowed repair eliminates the obstruction under the semantics of the chosen instantiation. In SEAM-Ω, a budget is represented by an orthogonal projector 𝑃 and a cost metric 𝐶 , and hard feasibility is the linear condition 𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 ) developed in Section 4.2. 

Definition 2.5 (Scientific verdict) . Given a candidate set of budgets {𝑏 𝑘 }, a numerical zero-obstruction tolerance 𝜏 zero ,and an optional unrestricted fallback budget 𝑏 all , a SEAM verdict is defined piecewise. If ‖𝜔 ‖ ≤ 𝜏 zero , the verdict is 

𝗀𝗅𝗈𝖻𝖺𝗅𝗅𝗒 _𝖺𝖽𝗆𝗂𝗌𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 , and no repair budget is selected. When ‖𝜔 ‖ > 𝜏 zero , define the exact-feasible budget set by 

 (𝜔 ) ∶= { 𝑏 𝑘 ∶ the hard repair problem for 𝑏 𝑘 is feasible for 𝜔 }.

In SEAM-Ω, this feasible-set definition becomes  (𝜔 ) = { 𝑏 𝑘 ∶ 𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 𝑏 𝑘 )} . The feasible set of specific accounts is 

proper (𝜔 ) ∶=  (𝜔 ) ⧵ {𝑏 all },

with the set subtraction omitted when no unrestricted fallback is in the catalog. If proper (𝜔 ) = ∅ , the verdict is unresolved by the declared specific accounts and reports their residuals. If this set has one element, that account is the only specific account retained by exact feasibility. If the set has several elements, all are retained, and the attribution is non-unique. Each feasible budget carries its own minimum repair cost, but costs do not select among accounts with different permitted subspaces. In SEAM-Ω, scientific verdicts are based on exact feasibility, while soft records provide comparative attribution together with their residuals. The exact branch is decisive when the obstruction concentrates in the channel that a budget permits. Under the block-diagonal channel restrictions adopted in Section 3.4, a single-channel hard budget is feasible only when the obstruction components outside that channel vanish, so an obstruction spread across several channels refutes every single-channel account, and the attribution then rests on the soft records with their residuals. Section 4 develops this interpretation. The three definitions above form one hypothesis test. A candidate set of budgets is a set of declared diagnostic accounts of the same obstruction, and proper (𝜔 ) collects the specific accounts that survive the overlap evidence. A budget outside  (𝜔 ) is not merely expensive: No revision the budget permits removes the obstruction at all, so the evidence rules that account out, and only its residual is reported. An empty or multi-element proper feasible set makes the attribution unresolved or non-unique, respectively. The unrestricted fallback certifies repairability but is never interpreted as a causal account. The objects compared on an overlap can be regional predictions, residuals, closure summaries, observation records, or contract metadata. Disagreements among those objects enter the same channel and overlap diagnosis, budgeted intervention, and blind-direction analysis. The local–global amplitude-mismatch study in Section 9.2.1 provides the first numerical example. 

## 3. SEAM-Ω: finite explanation sheaves 

We now instantiate the SEAM paradigm using finite cellular sheaves (Curry, 2014; Robinson, 2014; Ghrist, 2014). SEAM-Ω assembles the degree-zero coboundary of the pairwise-overlap complex to obtain closed-form diagnostic, intervention, identifiability, and monitoring operators. The channel-resolved results use the block-diagonal restrictions stated in Assumption A0. Figure 4 shows the resulting construction on a three-region cover. 

3.1. Covers and nerves 

Let  ⊆ ℝ𝑑 be the computational domain. A cover  = ( 𝑈 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 is a finite collection of regions 𝑈 𝑖 ⊆  with ⋃ 

> 𝑖 ∈𝐼

𝑈 𝑖 = . Overlaps are permitted, and pairwise intersections 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ∶= 𝑈 𝑖 ∩ 𝑈 𝑗 may be empty. A nonempty 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 is the comparison support for the corresponding edge. In spatial applications, comparison supports are normally required to have nontrivial measure; an abstract cover may instead specify a finite set of shared evaluation points. The nerve of  , denoted  , is the simplicial complex with 𝑘 -simplices given by the (𝑘 + 1) -tuples (𝑖 0, … , 𝑖 𝑘 ) of indices whose corresponding intersection is nonempty. For SEAM-Ω, we truncate  to its 1-skeleton. The vertices of that 1-skeleton are regions 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 , and the edges are pairs 𝐸 = {( 𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∶ 𝑖 < 𝑗, 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ≠ ∅} .  

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 7 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Region 𝑈 1     

> 𝐹 (𝑈 1)
> state 𝑢 1
> closure 𝑐 1
> observation 𝑜 1
> metadata 𝜖 1

Region 𝑈 2     

> 𝐹 (𝑈 2)
> state 𝑢 2
> closure 𝑐 2
> observation 𝑜 2
> metadata 𝜖 2

Region 𝑈 3                   

> 𝐹 (𝑈 3)
> state 𝑢 3
> closure 𝑐 3
> observation 𝑜 3
> metadata 𝜖 3
> 𝑈 12
> overlap stalk
> 𝐹 (𝑈 12 )
> 𝑈 23
> overlap stalk
> 𝐹 (𝑈 23 )
> 𝜌 1,12 𝜌 2,12 𝜌 2,23 𝜌 3,23
> 𝜔 12 =𝜌 2,12 𝑠 2−𝜌 1,12 𝑠 1𝜔 23 =𝜌 3,23 𝑠 3−𝜌 2,23 𝑠 2

Figure 4: Finite explanation sheaf 𝐹 on a three-region cover. Each region 𝑈 𝑖 carries a structured stalk partitioned into state, closure, and observation channels plus optional contract metadata. Each overlap 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 carries an overlap stalk 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) and two restriction maps. The raw admissibility defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 collects the per-overlap disagreements 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 = 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑗 − 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 . Under the block-diagonal channel restrictions of Assumption A0, the channel decomposition of 𝜔 commutes with the coboundary. 

Remark 3.1 (Cover construction in practice) . For PDE applications,  is typically chosen by domain decomposition with a prescribed overlap fraction 𝛼 ov . For time-series applications,  is chosen by regime decomposition across seasons, market regimes, or fault states, with overlap windows at regime transitions. For purely data-driven applications, 

 may be specified abstractly via a list of overlapping evaluation points. Evaluation partitions such as benchmark splits or held-out folds use this same construction: Each partition is one region, and the evaluation points scored under two partitions form their overlap. Disjoint partitions carry no edge until shared evaluation points are designated. The SEAM-Ω implementation supports both spatial and abstract covers, as described in Section 8. 

3.2. Explanation stalks and channel conventions 

We now equip each region with a structured local explanation space. 

Definition 3.2 (Local explanation) . A local explanation on region 𝑈 𝑖 is a tuple 

𝑒 𝑖 = ( 𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑜 𝑖 , 𝜖 𝑖 ),

where 𝑢 𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑛 𝑢,𝑖 is the discretized state field on the per-region grid and contains predicted values of the dependent variable of interest. The closure vector 𝑐 𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑛 𝑐,𝑖 represents parameters or discretized values of hidden source terms, unresolved subgrid physics, or another latent block that the local generator attributes to the region. The observation summary 𝑜 𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑛 𝑜,𝑖 contains sensor means and the flattened diagonal of the local measurement covariance. The optional contract-metadata vector 𝜖 𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑛 𝜖,𝑖 contains per-contract repair magnitudes, conservation residuals, and other scalar admissibility flags emitted by the local generator; 𝑛 𝜖,𝑖 may be zero. Formulas label this optional block as meta . The block is metadata and is distinct from an intervention budget 𝑃 , which specifies a subspace of allowable corrections as in Definition 2.4. The embedding of the explanation is the concatenation vec( 𝑒 𝑖 ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 𝑖 with 𝑑 𝑖 ∶= 𝑛 𝑢,𝑖 + 𝑛 𝑐,𝑖 + 𝑛 𝑜,𝑖 + 𝑛 𝜖,𝑖 .The common uniform-dimensional case is recovered by setting the nonzero dimensions independent of 𝑖 .

Definition 3.3 (Explanation stalk) . The explanation stalk at region 𝑈 𝑖 is 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ) ∶= ℝ𝑑 𝑖 , equipped with the standard inner product and the partition into three primary diagnostic blocks and one optional metadata block, 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ) = 

𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 )state ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 )closure ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 )obs ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 )meta with dimensions 𝑛 𝑢,𝑖 , 𝑛 𝑐,𝑖 , 𝑛 𝑜,𝑖 , and 𝑛 𝜖,𝑖 .The choice of which fields go into which channel is part of the modeling design. We discuss two canonical conventions. 

PDE convention. For PDE generators, the state block holds the discretized solution on the per-region grid; the closure block holds parameters or discretized values of any source, forcing, or subgrid model; and the observation block holds the sensor means and covariance diagonal on the region. When present, the optional metadata block holds cumulative magnitudes of conservation repairs applied during the solve. 

Regression convention. For wrapped regression predictors, as used throughout the tabular regression studies, the state block holds the predictor outputs at the overlap evaluation points; the closure block is zero or carries residual statistics; 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 8 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

the observation block is zero; and the optional metadata block is absent. The framework gracefully degenerates to a pure state-channel diagnostic in this case. 

3.3. Restriction maps, coboundary assembly, and the raw admissibility defect 

For each overlap (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 , we fix an overlap stalk 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) ∶= ℝ𝑚 𝑖𝑗 and two restriction maps 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 ∶ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ) → 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )

and 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 ∶ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑗 ) → 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ).

Definition 3.4 (Restriction map) . A restriction map 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 ∶ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ) → 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) is a linear map represented by a real 

𝑚 𝑖𝑗 × 𝑑 𝑖 matrix that sends vec( 𝑒 𝑖 ) to the quantities that must be compared on the overlap. The map respects channels, meaning that 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) decomposes as 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) = 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )state ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )closure ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )obs ⊕ 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )meta and 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 acts block-diagonally with respect to the two partitions. The state-channel block of 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 is typically an interpolation operator that resamples the per-region state grid onto the overlap grid. The closure-channel block extracts the closure quantities relevant to the overlap region. In the simplest case, that block is the identity on 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 )closure followed by a linear map into 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )closure . The observation-channel block selects the sensor entries that fall in the overlap. The optional metadata block is zero unless a contract quantity, such as a global conservation residual, is explicitly shared across regions. 

Remark 3.5 (Hand-crafted and learned restrictions) . SEAM-Ω uses geometry-defined restrictions, as in application-specific constructions such as the discourse sheaves of Hansen and Ghrist (2021). Learned restriction maps, reviewed in Section 10.1, can implement the same interface whenever those maps remain interpretable. We assemble the per-region stalks into the cochain spaces 

𝐶 0(𝐹 ) ∶= ⨁

> 𝑖 ∈𝐼

𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ), 𝐶 1(𝐹 ) ∶= ⨁

> (𝑖,𝑗 )∈ 𝐸

𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ).

Definition 3.6 (Coboundary) . The coboundary of 𝐹 is the linear map 𝑑 0 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) → 𝐶 1(𝐹 ) defined by 

(𝑑 0𝑠 )𝑖𝑗 ∶= 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑗 − 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 , 𝑠 = ( 𝑠 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 ∈ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸. 

We write 𝐷 ∶= mat( 𝑑 0) for the assembled coboundary matrix in the standard bases. A global section of 𝐹 is an element 𝑠 ∈ ker 𝑑 0: a family of stalk vectors whose restrictions agree on every overlap. 

Definition 3.7 (Raw admissibility defect) . Given a family of local explanations (𝑒 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 , let 𝑠 𝑖 ∶= vec( 𝑒 𝑖 ). The raw admissibility defect 𝜔 ∈ 𝐶 1(𝐹 ) is the 1-cochain 

𝜔 ∶= 𝑑 0𝑠, 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 = 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑗 − 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 , (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸. 

The terms raw admissibility defect and raw obstruction cochain are synonymous for this 𝜔 .The symbol ‖⋅‖ denotes the Euclidean norm induced by the standard inner products, and an explicit subscript 2

marks that same norm. The one departure is ‖⋅‖𝐶 , the norm induced by the positive-definite cost metric 𝐶 introduced in Section 3.5. Channel weights and whitening maps act on the argument, as in ‖‖𝑊 ∙𝜔 ∙‖‖2, leaving the norm Euclidean; the remaining subscripts name the object being measured rather than a metric. The norm ‖𝜔 ‖ is the scalar summary of inadmissibility, and the channel norms given in Eq. 1, together with the per-overlap norms, refine that summary. The subsection below introduces hypothesis-specific budget residuals. 

3.4. Channel decomposition of 𝜔 

Assumption A0 (Block-diagonal channel restrictions) . For the channel decomposition to commute with the coboundary, restriction maps act block-diagonally with respect to the channel partition. Each 𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 has no off-block entries mixing state, closure, observation, and optional metadata components. This block-diagonal restriction structure is a modeling choice we adopt throughout SEAM-Ω. We index this assumption by zero because the block-diagonal structure is adopted here for the construction itself rather than for any individual result; Section 7 lists Assumption A0 alongside the repair and model conventions used by the result suite.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 9 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Under Assumption A0, 𝐷 is block diagonal with respect to the channel decomposition; its pseudoinverse and the projector 𝐷𝐷 + inherit the block structure. The defect therefore decomposes: 

𝜔 = 𝜔 state ⊕ 𝜔 closure ⊕ 𝜔 obs ⊕ 𝜔 meta , (1) where ∙ ranges over the three primary channel labels and the optional metadata label {state , closure , obs , meta} , and each overlap component 𝜔 ∙ 

> 𝑖𝑗

lives in the corresponding sub-block 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 )∙. Channel comparisons use a fixed channel metric or normalization. In the simplest unit-scaled case, we summarize each channel by its norm: ‖‖𝜔 state ‖‖, ‖‖‖𝜔 closure ‖‖‖,

‖‖‖𝜔 obs ‖‖‖, and ‖‖𝜔 meta ‖‖. The three primary scalars provide the diagnostic report; the optional meta-labeled scalar records contract-metadata disagreement when that block is present. With channel weights or whitening matrices 𝑊 ∙, we compute the denominator and, when 𝑍 > 0, the calibrated fractions 

𝑍 ∶= ∑

> ◦

‖‖𝑊 ◦𝜔 ◦‖‖22 , 𝑝 ∙ ∶= 

‖‖𝑊 ∙𝜔 ∙‖‖22

𝑍 (𝑍 > 0) ,

where ◦ ranges over the active labels in the same set as ∙. The channel reported as dominant is the one maximizing 𝑝 ∙,so a dominance report is meaningful only relative to the declared 𝑊 ∙. Section 4.1 states the reporting rule that these fractions feed, including the degenerate 𝑍 = 0 case. 

Remark 3.8 (Resolution of the channel summary) . The channel decomposition is a first-order summary of inadmissibility. Two systems with identical channel norms can have qualitatively different obstruction structures, differing in their 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 

profiles across overlaps. The full 𝜔 , the per-overlap norms ‖‖‖𝜔 𝑖𝑗 

‖‖‖, the channel report, and the budgeted intervention costs together provide the richer report detailed in Section 4. 

3.5. Budgeted obstruction and residual-aware attribution 

A scientific hypothesis restricts the allowed correction to a strict subspace im 𝑃 ⊊ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ). For example, a hypothesis may allow revision only of the closure block. The hard residual below tests whether the restricted operator 𝐷𝑃 can reproduce the full raw defect. A regularized-soft record is reported separately when the restricted operator cannot. 

Definition 3.9 (Budgeted obstruction) . Let 𝑃 ∈ ℝ𝑁 ×𝑁 be the orthogonal projector onto a closed budget subspace of 

𝐶 0(𝐹 ), and let 𝐶 ≻ 0 be the metric used to measure corrections. The hard budgeted obstruction residual at budget 𝑃 is 

𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) ∶= 𝜔 − ( 𝐷𝑃 )( 𝐷𝑃 )+𝜔 ∈ ker( 𝐷𝑃 )⊤.

The budgeted feasibility indicator is the Boolean 𝟏 [𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) = 0] , equivalently 𝟏 [𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 )] . The hard budgeted intervention cost is the metric-dependent extended-real value 

𝑐 hard  

> 𝑃 ,𝐶

(𝜔 ) ∶= 

{‖‖‖𝛿 ⋆𝑃 ,𝐶 

‖‖‖ 

> 2
> 𝐶

, 𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 ),

+∞ , 𝜔 ∉ im( 𝐷𝑃 ),

where 𝛿 ⋆𝑃 ,𝐶 is the minimum-cost feasible correction from Theorem 1 in the first case. The residual depends on 𝑃 and the codomain metric used for projection, while the minimizer and cost also depend on 𝐶 . We often write 𝑟 𝑃 and 𝑐 hard 

> 𝑃

when 𝐶 and the hard-residual convention are fixed. A budget status is exact-feasible, tolerance-feasible, or infeasible with a soft diagnostic. The modifier exact-hard is reserved for costs and verdicts derived solely from exact-feasible hard problems. Scientific verdicts are based on exact feasibility, while tolerance and soft empirical attribution records include their residuals (Engl, Hanke and Neubauer, 1996). At the unrestricted budget 𝑃 = I , every raw admissibility defect is exactly repairable. For proper budgets such as 

𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖢𝗅𝗈𝗌𝗎𝗋𝖾 or 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖲𝖾𝗇𝗌𝗈𝗋𝖱𝖾𝗃𝖾𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗈𝗇 , 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) is generically nontrivial and is the operational signal of hypothesis feasibility.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 10 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

## 4. Obstruction-guided diagnosis and intervention 

We now turn the obstruction cochain into a scientific diagnostic. The pipeline has two primary outputs. The per-channel decomposition provides a static map of where disagreement occurs, while the budgeted preimage computation tests which permitted revisions can explain that disagreement. Exact-hard feasibility and the set of retained proper budgets determine the formal verdict; each feasible budget’s cost quantifies its own repair burden. Residual-aware regularized records are reported separately as empirical attribution rather than as exact tests. 

4.1. From obstruction to channel diagnosis 

The first component reads the channel decomposition of Eq. 1 without solving any optimization. 

Total and per-channel norms. We compute the total raw norm and, for each channel ∙ ∈ {state , closure , obs , meta} ,the corresponding per-channel norm: 

‖𝜔 ‖22 = ∑

> (𝑖,𝑗 )∈ 𝐸

‖‖‖𝜔 𝑖𝑗 

‖‖‖ 

> 22

, ‖𝜔 ∙‖22 = ∑

> (𝑖,𝑗 )∈ 𝐸

‖‖‖𝜔 ∙

> 𝑖𝑗

‖‖‖ 

> 22

.

If ‖𝜔 ‖2 ≤ 𝜏 zero , no dominant channel is reported, and the verdict is 𝗀𝗅𝗈𝖻𝖺𝗅𝗅𝗒 _𝖺𝖽𝗆𝗂𝗌𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 . Otherwise, we form the calibrated fractions 𝑝 ∙ of Section 3.4, with 𝑊 ∙ = I only in the unit-scaled default. If 𝑍 > 0, channel dominance is reported as the channel maximizing 𝑝 ∙. If 𝑍 = 0 , no dominant channel is reported, and the fraction vector is left undefined; this zero-denominator case can arise only from the chosen calibration weights or whitening maps and does not override the zero-obstruction verdict branch. 

Per-overlap norms. For each overlap (𝑖, 𝑗 ), we report the per-channel decomposition of 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 . This per-overlap decomposition produces an overlap-level map that identifies which interfaces carry each kind of disagreement. The household-power cross-framework audit provides an example in which the winter–spring overlap is dominant. In general, the dominant overlap is the overlap maximizing ‖‖‖𝜔 𝑖𝑗 

‖‖‖

> 22

.

What the channel diagnosis tells us. State dominance means that the predicted state fields disagree on the overlap. This state-channel disagreement is the default mode for locally trained regression models that have not seen one another’s regions. Closure dominance means that regional hidden-physics representations or closure parameters are inconsistent across regions. Closure dominance arises when one or more regions have an active conservation contract, as in Theorem 2, or when one region’s closure was learned from data unavailable to the others. Observation dominance indicates disagreement among sensor readings or their summary statistics, and commonly reflects differences in sensor noise or drift. A nonzero optional metadata component indicates that declared contract records disagree across regions. That component is reported as metadata rather than treated as a causal intervention account; none of the reported experiments uses an optional-metadata intervention budget. This channel-level diagnostic requires only matrix–vector products and no optimization. The resulting total and channel norms therefore provide suitable signals for the streaming monitoring described in Section 6. 

4.2. Budgeted intervention: exact tests and soft attribution 

The second component treats each declared account of the source of disagreement as an intervention budget and evaluates the cost of the minimum-cost intervention under that account. Hard feasibility determines which proper accounts survive. Costs are reported within each account but do not rank an unrestricted fallback against a more specific budget. The antitonicity result in Theorem 1 explains this separation: Enlarging a budget under a shared metric cannot increase its minimum repair cost. The verdict of Definition 2.5 is then applied. 

Definition 4.1 (Standard budgets) . The SEAM-Ω framework uses the following standard intervention budgets, each defined by an orthogonal projector 𝑃 onto a subspace of 𝐶 0(𝐹 ): The 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖲𝗍𝖺𝗍𝖾 budget projects onto the state channel and permits correction of predicted state fields. The 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖢𝗅𝗈𝗌𝗎𝗋𝖾 budget projects onto the closure channel and permits correction of hidden physics or sources. The 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖲𝖾𝗇𝗌𝗈𝗋𝖱𝖾𝗃𝖾𝖼𝗍𝗂𝗈𝗇 budget projects onto the observation channel and permits sensor readings to be reweighted or rejected. The 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖠𝗅𝗅 fallback uses 𝑃 = I and permits unrestricted intervention.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 11 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

For each budget, we solve the constrained quadratic program 

min   

> 𝛿 ∈𝐶 0(𝐹 )12

𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 subject to 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 = 𝜔, (I − 𝑃 )𝛿 = 0 , (2) where 𝐶 is a positive-definite cost metric. The repaired explanations are then 

𝑠 repaired ∶= 𝑠 − 𝑃 𝛿 ⋆, (3) so that 𝐷𝑠 repaired = 𝐷𝑠 − 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 ⋆ = 𝜔 − 𝜔 = 0 , recovering admissibility. We adopt this sign convention uniformly: 

𝛿 ⋆ is the correction subtracted from the current stalk vector. The norm ‖‖𝛿 ⋆‖‖𝐶 does not depend on the sign; only the interpretation does. The closed-form solution is given by Theorem 1. When Eq. 2 is infeasible, so that 𝜔 ∉ im( 𝐷𝑃 ), we report the hard cost 𝑐 hard  

> 𝑃

= +∞ together with the hard residual 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) of Definition 3.9, whose norm quantifies how badly the hypothesis fails. 

Exact verdicts and auxiliary soft records. The system returns the per-budget record 

(budget label , status 𝑏 , 𝑐 hard  

> 𝑏

, 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑏

(𝜔 )) 

and applies Definition 2.5 to the exact-feasible records. The verdict reports the full set of retained proper budgets and treats 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖠𝗅𝗅 only as a repairability fallback. Hard costs remain attached to their own budgets and are not combined into a cross-budget score. Auxiliary soft records are reported as specified in Definition 3.9 and always include their residuals, so their intervention magnitudes are not conflated with exact-hard verdicts. Figure 5 shows such soft records for the data–physics conflict-attribution study of Section 9.4. 

Interpretation of the budget comparison. The budget catalog specifies the candidate diagnostic accounts. The closure-revision budget encodes the account that closure is the permitted locus of revision. The sensor-rejection budget analogously restricts revisions to observations. Other budgets encode further accounts, and the catalog is open: Theorem 1 is stated for the orthogonal projector onto an arbitrary closed subspace 𝑉 𝑃 ⊆ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), so any account that a practitioner can state as a set of permitted revisions enters the comparison as a projector, whether or not that set is one of the named channels. Exact feasibility retains or refutes each account separately. The minimum cost then measures the smallest repair within a retained account, rather than supplying a causal ranking across different allowed subspaces. 

Refutation and unresolved attribution. Each entry in the catalog is separately refutable, which is what makes the comparison a test rather than a weighting. A budget whose hard problem is infeasible is ruled out by the overlap evidence rather than merely outbid, and its residual ‖‖‖𝑟 hard  

> 𝑏

(𝜔 )‖‖‖ records how far the permitted revisions fall short of accounting for 𝜔 . When every proper budget is ruled out and only the unrestricted budget remains feasible, that fallback carries no diagnostic specificity, because unrestricted revision repairs every raw defect by construction. The identifiability analysis in Section 5 then records which admissible directions remain invisible to the present observation map. In that situation, SEAM reports the unresolved subspace rather than assigning a unique interpretation to the unrestricted repair. 

4.3. Closure-restricted repair and missing-physics diagnosis 

Learning or correcting unresolved closure terms is an established scientific machine learning problem, especially in data-driven turbulence modeling (Duraisamy, Iaccarino and Xiao, 2019). Field inversion and machine learning provides a direct computational precedent by inferring spatially distributed functional corrections for deficient closure models (Parish and Duraisamy, 2016). SEAM’s closure-repair test determines whether adjusting the modeled closure removes an overlap obstruction, returning the corresponding minimum-cost reconstruction. A feasible, low-cost closure-channel preimage supports the missing-closure hypothesis, and repair under the closure-revision budget yields the minimum-cost reconstruction with respect to the selected closure-channel metric. In the channel-separated model used here, the restricted repair solves the preimage problem for 𝜔 closure ; state mismatches require a state-revision or channel-coupled budget.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 12 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy Closure corruption Sensor corruption 

0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 

> Soft squared intervention norm

0.11 1.47 1.39 0.08 

Closure diagnostic Sensor-rejection diagnostic 

Figure 5: Soft budget-attribution ranking in the data–physics conflict-attribution study. The figure reports per-budget soft squared intervention norms in relative units for two configurations of the same three-region system. In the closure-corruption condition, the closure diagnostic is cheap, and the sensor-rejection diagnostic is expensive. In the sensor-corruption condition, the sensor-rejection diagnostic is cheap, and the closure diagnostic is expensive. For standard single-channel hard budgets under Assumption A0, a finite hard cost requires full feasibility 𝜔 ∈ im( 𝐷𝑃 𝑏 ); wrong-channel single-channel hard costs are 

+∞ unless the non-target obstruction components vanish. The plotted ratios are therefore empirical soft diagnostics with residuals recorded in the diagnostic record, not theorem-level full hard-cost comparisons. 

Let 𝜄 closure denote the zero-extension into 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), let Π∙ denote the coordinate projection onto channel ∙, and define the closure-channel block 

𝐷 𝐶 ∶= Π closure 𝐷𝜄 closure ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 )closure → 𝐶 1(𝐹 )closure ,

which is the whole closure-channel content of 𝐷 because Assumption A0 gives Π∙𝐷𝜄 closure = 0 for every ∙ ≠ closure .Corollary 7.3 supplies the minimum-norm closure correction 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝐷 𝐶 +𝜔 closure ∈ row( 𝐷 𝐶 ) whenever 𝜔 closure ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 ,together with the repaired explanations (𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 − 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 |𝑖 , 𝑜 𝑖 , 𝜖 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 , whose closure-channel defect vanishes, while every non-closure component of 𝐷𝑠 is unchanged. For a raw SEAM-Ω defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 , that image condition holds automatically, since 𝜔 closure = 𝐷 𝐶 𝑠 𝐶 for the closure-channel component 𝑠 𝐶 of 𝑠 , so the closure repair needs no separate image-membership test. 

Remark 4.2 (Physical sign and weighted closure costs) . The vector 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 is the algebraic correction subtracted from the current closure block. Under 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝜄 closure 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 , the physical closure increment added to the model is therefore ̂𝑐 missing ∶= − 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 . This increment has a physical missing-source interpretation when the closure block faithfully represents the source feature and is identifiable modulo ker 𝐷 𝐶 under the current observation map. For a non-identity closure cost 

𝐶 𝐶 ≻ 0, the minimum-cost correction is 

𝐶 −1  

> 𝐶

𝐷 ⊤𝐶 (𝐷 𝐶 𝐶 −1  

> 𝐶

𝐷 ⊤𝐶 )+𝜔 closure ,

which reduces to the Moore–Penrose formula in the Euclidean metric. Corollary 7.3 is stated in Section 7.3 and proved in Appendix B.4. The hidden-source recovery for Burgers study in Section 9.3.1 documents the empirical content. For inviscid Burgers with hidden closure summaries, the recovered physical closure increment −𝛿 ⋆𝐶 has its peak at ̂𝑥 0 = 0 .501 , within 0.2% of the true center 𝑥 0 = 0 .5 and displaced by 

1.7% of the source width 𝑤 = 0 .06 . The projected recovery has a closure-channel repair residual below 5% ; the exact image-membership case of Corollary 7.3 has zero residual. The accompanying state-revision result is a soft attribution record with its residual relative to the same closure-channel right-hand side. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 13 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

## 5. Identifiability 

Diagnosis tells us what disagrees. Identifiability analysis then determines which admissibility-preserving adjustments are distinguishable by current observations. This distinction separates detected inconsistency from directions that remain unresolved by the available data. 

5.1. Blind admissible directions and the observable quotient 

Throughout this section, we fix a linear observation map 𝑂 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) → 𝑌 with 𝑌 a finite-dimensional output space. The observation map encodes how sensors see the global section 𝑠 ∈ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ). Typically, 𝑂 has a block-diagonal structure that extracts the observation-channel components of the explanations. The kernel ker 𝐷 of the coboundary is the subspace of admissible directions whose restrictions agree on every overlap, thereby leaving the overlap-disagreement vector unchanged. Within ker 𝐷 , we distinguish two operationally important subspaces. 

Definition 5.1 (Blind admissible subspace and observable admissible quotient) . The blind admissible subspace is 

 ∶= ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 ⊆ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ).

When the dependence of  on the observation map matters, we write this subspace as (𝑂 ). Directions in  preserve admissibility and are invisible to the current observation map. The observable admissible quotient is 

 ∶= ker 𝐷 ∕ ≅ (ker 𝐷 ) ∩ ⟂.

The isomorphism uses the orthogonal complement inside ker 𝐷 . Directions in  preserve admissibility and are visible to current observations. 

Remark 5.2 (Observable and blind admissible directions) . Together,  and  describe the current observational resolution within the admissible space. The subspace  contains the unresolved directions, while  parameterizes the resolved classes. The two subspaces have complementary dimensions. Proposition 7.2 records the identity 

dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), dim  = rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), (4) so that dim ker 𝐷 = dim  + dim . The proof is a direct application of rank–nullity to 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 with ker( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ) = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 = ; see Appendix B.3. 

Computing . The numerical procedure begins by building an orthonormal basis 𝑉 ker of ker 𝐷 with a full singular value decomposition (SVD) or an explicit rank-revealing nullspace routine, ensuring that structural right-null directions are retained. The procedure then forms the restricted operator 𝑂𝑉 ker and computes either its full right-nullspace basis or a full SVD. All right singular directions whose singular values lie below a tolerance 𝜂 svd are selected, including structural right-null directions omitted by an economy decomposition. Finally, 𝑉 ker maps these vectors back to 𝐶 0(𝐹 )

to obtain an orthonormal basis 𝐵  of . The certificate records several checks: 

‖‖𝐷𝐵 ‖‖ ≤ 𝜂 𝐷 ‖‖𝐵 ‖‖ , ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖ ≤ 𝜂 𝑂 ‖‖𝐵 ‖‖ , ‖‖‖𝐵 ⊤

> 

𝐵  − I ‖‖‖ ≤ 𝜂 orth ,

together with the dimension identity in Proposition 7.2. The blind-closure identifiability study reports the observation-invisibility component ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖ < 10 −14 .

What  tells us. The blind admissible subspace specifies the resolution of the SEAM diagnostic. A nonzero dim 

means that there exist directions in which the local explanations can be adjusted without violating admissibility and without changing any current observation. The identifiability report marks these directions as unresolved by the present data, qualifying any attribution accordingly.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 14 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

## 6. Monitoring learned generators 

The diagnostic of Sections 4 and 5 treats the local generators as static. For learned generators such as neural operators, PINNs, regression models, and hybrid scientific pipelines, the family of local explanations depends on input data that may shift over time. SEAM-Ω extends naturally to streaming monitoring of these systems. Let 𝐺 𝜃 be a trained operator with parameters 𝜃 , and let {𝑥 𝑡 }𝑡 ≥0 be a streaming input sequence. Examples include time series of PDE initial conditions, sensor data, and regulatory inputs. At each time 𝑡 , we apply to 𝑥 𝑡 the family of local generators {𝐺 𝑖,𝜃 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 obtained by restricting the operator to each region, thereby producing a family of local explanations 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑡 ) = 𝐺 𝑖,𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 ).

Definition 6.1 (Streaming obstruction) . The stacked explanation and streaming obstruction at time 𝑡 are 

𝑠 (𝑡 ) ∶= (vec( 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑡 ))) 𝑖 ∈𝐼 ∈ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ),𝜔 (𝑡 ) ∶= 𝐷𝑠 (𝑡 ) ∈ 𝐶 1(𝐹 ).

The streaming obstruction is a time-indexed family of vectors in 𝐶 1(𝐹 ). At each time, the report contains the total disagreement ‖𝜔 (𝑡 )‖ and the norm ‖𝜔 ∙(𝑡 )‖ for each channel. These quantities can be compared with contemporaneous model error or with a baseline recorded during training, but SEAM does not assign a universal alarm threshold. 

Example: neural operator under covariate shift. Mechanism M4 appears here in streaming form. For the Fourier neural operator (FNO) architecture (Li, Kovachki, Azizzadenesheli, Liu, Bhattacharya, Stuart and Anandkumar, 2021), trained on a distribution of Burgers initial conditions and evaluated on out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs, the FNO OOD monitoring study in Section 9.8.2 shows a correlation between ‖𝜔 (𝑡 )‖ and the 𝐿 2 prediction error relative to a high-resolution reference. This correlation is the empirical basis for using 𝜔 as a consistency monitor. Channel norms localize which part of the regional record changes, but the experiment does not establish a calibrated probabilistic detector or a universal causal interpretation for that change. 

## 7. Theoretical results 

This section collects two central theorems together with companion identifiability and closure-recovery results, and states their shared model conditions. Proofs are consolidated in Appendix B in the order stated here. Throughout, 𝐷 

denotes the assembled coboundary matrix of an explanation sheaf 𝐹 over the 1-skeleton of a finite cover’s nerve, 𝐷 + its Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse and associated projector construction (Penrose, 1955), 𝑃 an orthogonal projector onto a budget subspace of 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), and 𝐶 a positive-definite cost metric on 𝐶 0(𝐹 ). We write 𝐷𝑃 for the projected coboundary and let im( 𝐷𝑃 ) denote its image. Observation maps 𝑂 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) → 𝑌 are linear. 

Model conditions and conventions for Section 7. The result suite rests on the standing structural Assumption A0 together with the four repair and model conventions declared below. 

A0: block-diagonal channel restrictions. The channel-resolved results use Assumption A0 from Section 3.4, where the assumption is adopted for every restriction map of SEAM-Ω.

A1: repair sign convention. Corrections are subtracted from the current stalk vector. For a full hard repair, the convention reads 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝑃 𝛿 ⋆ with 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 ⋆ = 𝜔 . Corollary 7.3 uses the channel-restricted version 

𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝜄 closure 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 with 𝐷 𝐶 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝜔 closure . This convention is used by Theorem 1, Corollary 7.3, and the repair records of Sections 4 and 4.3. 

A2: positive-definite cost metric. The condition 𝐶 ≻ 0 holds on 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), giving the strict convexity required by Theorem 1. 

A3: row-space-aligned one-sided closure repair. In Theorem 2, the conservation-redistribution repair direction at the repaired endpoint lies in the domain-side row space of that endpoint’s closure restriction; the baseline overlap closures cancel; the neighboring endpoint contributes zero restricted repair on the overlap, 𝜌 closure ̄𝑞,𝑒 𝛿𝑐 ̄𝑞 = 0 ; and 𝜌 closure 

> 𝑞,𝑒

has positive rank. The projected form covers repair directions outside the row space; rank-zero restrictions carry no closure signal on the overlap.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 15 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Table 1 

Central results of SEAM-Ω and their operational roles. Result Subject Role Theorem 1 Minimum-cost budgeted intervention Closed-form 𝛿 ⋆ via restricted operators 𝐴 𝑃 = 𝐷𝑃 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 ,

𝐶 𝑃 = 𝜄 ⊤𝑉 𝑃 𝐶𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 , with 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝑃 𝛿 ⋆.Proposition Identifiability dimensions dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), while dim  = rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ).Corollary Closure-restricted recoverability 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝐷 𝐶 +𝜔 closure ∈ im( 𝐷 ⊤𝐶 ) = row( 𝐷 𝐶 ) when 𝜔 closure ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 .The repaired closure blocks are 𝑐 𝑖 − 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 |𝑖 .Theorem 2 Conservation-contract detectability Under A3, comprising baseline cancellation, one-sided zero neighbor contribution, positive rank, and row-space alignment 

𝛿𝑐 𝑞 ∈ row( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

), ‖‖𝜔 closure  

> 𝑒

‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min 𝜖 repair . The projected bound applies otherwise. 

A4: pairwise-overlap construction. All results use the 1-skeleton of the nerve. Table 1 summarizes the result suite and its roles in SEAM-Ω before the individual theorem statements. For Theorem 2 and its row in the table, 𝜎 +min denotes the smallest nonzero singular value; the distinction is necessary because the ordinary smallest singular value 𝜎 min is zero for a rank-deficient operator. 

7.1. Theorem 1: minimum-cost budgeted intervention 

Theorem 1 (Minimum-cost budgeted intervention) . Let 𝑃 be the orthogonal projector onto a closed subspace 

𝑉 𝑃 ⊆ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) called the budget subspace, and let 𝐶 ≻ 0 on 𝐶 0(𝐹 ). Define the restricted operators 

𝐴 𝑃 ∶= 𝐷𝑃 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 ∶ 𝑉 𝑃 → 𝐶 1(𝐹 ), 𝐶 𝑃 ∶= 𝜄 ⊤𝑉 𝑃 𝐶𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 ≻ 0 on 𝑉 𝑃 ,

where 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 ∶ 𝑉 𝑃 ↪ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) is the inclusion. Consider the constrained quadratic program 

min   

> 𝛿 ∈𝐶 0(𝐹 )12

𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 subject to 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 = 𝜔, (I − 𝑃 )𝛿 = 0 . (5) 

Feasibility criterion. The problem is feasible if and only if 𝜔 ∈ im 𝐴 𝑃 .

Closed-form solution. When feasible, the unique minimizer is 

𝛿 ⋆ = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 (𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔, (6) 

and the reported squared intervention cost is ‖‖𝛿 ⋆‖‖2 

> 𝐶

= 𝜔 ⊤(𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔 . The optimum of the objective 12 𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 in 

Eq. 5 is one half of this value. 

Soft Tikhonov form. For 𝜆 > 0, the unique minimizer of 12 𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 + ( 𝜆 ∕2) ‖𝐷𝛿 − 𝜔 ‖2 over 𝛿 ∈ 𝑉 𝑃 is 

𝛿 ⋆𝜆 = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 (𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 + 𝜆 −1 𝐶 𝑃 )−1 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔, (7) 

which is well-defined for all 𝜆 ∈ (0 , ∞) .

Antitonicity in budget. For a fixed ambient cost metric 𝐶 , suppose that 𝑉 𝑃 1 ⊆ 𝑉 𝑃 2 , meaning that the larger budget contains the smaller. Then, for every 𝜔 for which both problems are feasible under that same 𝐶 , the optimal costs satisfy ‖‖𝛿 ⋆(𝑃 2)‖‖2 

> 𝐶

≤ ‖‖𝛿 ⋆(𝑃 1)‖‖2 

> 𝐶

. Budget antitonicity therefore requires a shared ambient cost metric; budget inclusion alone is insufficient when the two budgets use different budget-specific metrics. 

Sign convention. The repaired stalk vector is 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝑃 𝛿 ⋆ with 𝛿 ⋆ ∈ 𝑉 𝑃 , so that 

𝐷𝑠 repaired = 𝜔 − 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 ⋆ = 0 .

The 𝑉 ⟂ 

> 𝑃

component of the stalk vector is unchanged. If 𝑃 is a channel projector, non-target channels are unchanged under Assumption A0. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 16 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Remark 7.1 (Restricted inverse and commutativity) . The identity (𝑃 𝐶𝑃 )+ = 𝑃 𝐶 −1 𝑃 is valid in the commutative case 

[𝑃 , 𝐶 ] = 0 but not for a general metric coupling 𝑉 𝑃 and 𝑉 ⟂ 

> 𝑃

. Restricting the metric to 𝑉 𝑃 gives the compressed inverse 

𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 (𝜄 ⊤𝑉 𝑃 𝐶𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 )−1 𝜄 ⊤𝑉 𝑃 ,

not generally 𝑃 𝐶 −1 𝑃 . The formulation above with 𝐴 𝑃 and 𝐶 𝑃 avoids the commutativity assumption entirely, and the reference implementation uses this restricted form. For 𝐶 = I , as adopted in all experiments, the restricted and ambient expressions coincide. 

7.2. Identifiability dimensions 

Proposition 7.2 (Identifiability dimensions) . Let 𝐷 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) → 𝐶 1(𝐹 ) be the coboundary and let 𝑂 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) → 𝑌 be a linear observation map. Define 

 ∶= ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂,  ∶= ker 𝐷 ∕.

Then the blind-space dimension is dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), the observable quotient has dimension 

dim  = rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), and the two dimensions sum to dim ker 𝐷 = dim  + dim . Moreover,  is the set of admissibility-preserving directions that are also invisible to 𝑂 , while  parameterizes the admissibility-preserving directions that 𝑂 can resolve. 

7.3. Closure-restricted recoverability 

Corollary 7.3 (Closure-restricted recoverability) . Let 𝐷 𝐶 be the closure-channel block of 𝐷 under Assumption A0, i.e., the typed map 𝐷 𝐶 ∶ 𝐶 0(𝐹 )closure → 𝐶 1(𝐹 )closure obtained by restricting the domain to the closure channel and projecting the codomain onto that channel. Suppose 𝜔 closure ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 . Then the unique minimum-norm closure correction in the Euclidean metric is 

𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝐷 𝐶 +𝜔 closure ∈ im( 𝐷 ⊤𝐶 ) = row( 𝐷 𝐶 ) = (ker 𝐷 𝐶 )⟂.

The repaired stalks (𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 − 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 |𝑖 , 𝑜 𝑖 , 𝜖 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 have zero closure-channel admissibility defect, and the non-closure channels of 𝜔 are unchanged. Under the sign convention, the zero-extended correction is subtracted consistently with the channel-restricted convention in A1. The recovered 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 is the unique element of im( 𝐷 ⊤𝐶 ) = row( 𝐷 𝐶 ) that achieves closure-channel admissibility, but adding any element of ker 𝐷 𝐶 leaves the closure obstruction unchanged. Such a closure direction belongs to  only after embedding that direction into the full stalk space and checking membership in ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 

according to Proposition 7.2. For raw admissibility defects 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 , Assumption A0 makes 𝜔 closure ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 automatic. 

7.4. Theorem 2: conservation-contract detectability 

Theorem 2 (Conservation-contract detectability) . Let 𝐹 be an explanation sheaf with closure-channel restrictions 

𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

under Assumption A0. Let 𝑒 = ( 𝑎, 𝑏 ) be an oriented overlap edge and let 𝑞 ∈ { 𝑎, 𝑏 } be the repaired endpoint. Suppose 𝑈 𝑞 applies a conservation-contract repair whose actual closure-channel vector entering the restriction is 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 ,and set 𝜖 repair ∶= ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖.Assume the following conditions, which together instantiate A3: 

Baseline cancellation. The baseline closure restrictions agree on 𝑒 before repair: 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑎,𝑒

𝑐 0 

> 𝑎

= 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑏,𝑒

𝑐 0 

> 𝑏

.

Row-space alignment. The repair direction 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 lies in row( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

).

One-sided zero contribution. The other endpoint’s restricted repair contribution on 𝑒 is zero: 𝜌 closure ̄𝑞,𝑒 𝛿𝑐 ̄𝑞 = 0 , where ̄𝑞 

denotes the endpoint other than 𝑞 .

Positive-rank restriction. The map 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

has positive rank. 

Conclusion. Let 𝜀 𝑎 ∶= −1 and 𝜀 𝑏 ∶= +1 . Then, under baseline cancellation and the one-sided zero-contribution condition, the restricted defect and its closure-channel lower bound are 

𝜔 closure  

> 𝑒

= 𝜀 𝑞 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

𝛿𝑐 𝑞 , ‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑒

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min (𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) ⋅ 𝜖 repair . (8)   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 17 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Projected variant without row-space alignment. If baseline cancellation, one-sided zero contribution, and the positive-rank restriction hold but row-space alignment fails, the same argument gives the projected bound 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑒

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min (𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) ⋅ ‖‖‖Πrow( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒 )

𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ , (9) 

where Πrow( 𝜌 closure   

> 𝑞,𝑒 )

denotes the orthogonal projector onto the indicated row space. This bound equals Eq. 8 under row-space alignment and is strictly weaker otherwise. If both endpoints are repaired, a positive lower bound in terms of 

‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ additionally requires a quantitative non-cancellation assumption on the net restricted repair. 

Rank-zero convention. If rank( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) = 0 , then 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

carries no closure signal on the overlap: The projected row-space term is zero, and 𝜎 +min (𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) is not defined. Remark 7.4 (How CT-SEAM satisfies the row-space condition) . The conservation-contract repair operator in CT-SEAM, described in Appendix D, applies a uniform scalar correction over the 1D closure coordinate used by the overlap restriction. For that experimental closure block, the domain-side repair vector is assumed to lie in row( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

). In more general closure spaces, this row-space membership must be checked explicitly; otherwise, the projected bound Eq. 9 applies. 

Empirical verification. The conservation-contract detectability study in Section 9.3.2 verifies the bound on a three-region Burgers configuration with an active conservation repair: The observed ‖‖‖𝜔 closure 12 

‖‖‖ = 1 .172 exceeds the predicted lower bound of 𝜎 +min 𝜖 repair = 0 .128 by a factor of 9.2. The associated parametric sweep reports a pass for all 25 configurations under the prespecified 10% discretization-tolerant criterion and exhibits the predicted approximately linear scaling with repair magnitude. 

Sensitivity floor. The bound is tight when the repaired endpoint’s closure vector 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 aligns with the right singular vector of 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

corresponding to the smallest nonzero singular value. The bound is loose when 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 aligns with the dominant singular vectors. The sensitivity floor 𝜎 +min is therefore a worst-case detection floor; in practice, generic repair directions yield much larger closure obstructions. The slack factor is a useful diagnostic in its own right, because a small slack indicates a near-minimum-detection repair direction. 

## 8. Algorithms and computational workflow 

Here we present the core algorithms in mathematically clean form; Appendix C records the numerical conventions used by the reference implementation. The presentation groups the core diagnostic workflow and its extensions before treating the computational and audit properties of the resulting implementation. 

8.1. Diagnostic workflow and extensions 

Top-level SEAM-Ω diagnostic pipeline. The top-level diagnostic pipeline is Algorithm 1. The index set bud labels the finite budget catalog. The pipeline returns a structured diagnostic record. 

Budgeted intervention solver. Algorithm 2 implements the minimum-cost intervention result of Theorem 1 in closed form and couples that result to an explicit feasibility check. After restricting the coboundary and cost metric to the budget subspace 𝑉 𝑃 , the algorithm uses the hard residual to distinguish exact-feasible and tolerance-feasible repairs from infeasible cases, which are passed to the soft Tikhonov diagnostic. Two implementation notes apply. First, pseudoinverses are computed via a project-specific truncated SVD tolerance, stated uniformly in Appendix C.2; library defaults are not assumed, and the exact routine and version are recorded whenever an implementation relies on one. Second, the matrices 𝐴 𝑃 and 𝐶 𝑃 are typically small, so dense linear algebra is appropriate. For larger problems, exact pseudoinverse projection with a truncated or randomized SVD requires retaining every singular direction above the chosen rank tolerance; smaller retained ranks yield approximate low-rank diagnostics. 

Identifiability. Algorithm 3 implements the two-stage nullspace construction and returns its numerical certificate.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 18 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Algorithm 1: SEAM-Ω diagnostic pipeline, diagnose .

Require: cover  , local generators {𝐺 𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝐼 , input data 𝑥 , restriction maps {𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 , 𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 }(𝑖,𝑗 )∈ 𝐸 , observation map 𝑂 ,budget catalog {( 𝑃 𝑏 , 𝐶 𝑏 )} 𝑏 ∈bud , zero-obstruction tolerance 𝜏 zero .

Ensure: 𝜔 , channel norms, per-budget hard records, tolerance and soft diagnostic records, identifiability basis, diagnostic record.  

> 1:

Generate: for each 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼 , compute 𝑒 𝑖 ← 𝐺 𝑖 (𝑥, 𝑈 𝑖 ) and 𝑠 𝑖 ← vec( 𝑒 𝑖 ); set 𝑠 ← (𝑠 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 . 

> 2:

Restrict and obstruct: assemble 𝐷 from the restriction maps; compute 𝜔 ← 𝐷𝑠 . 

> 3:

Decompose channels: compute ‖𝜔 ∙‖ for ∙ ∈ {state , closure , obs , meta} . 

> 4:

Apply budgeted intervention for each budget 𝑏 :solve Eq. 5 to obtain 𝛿 ⋆𝑏 or detect infeasibility. record exact feasibility status; 𝑐 hard  

> 𝑏

, which is finite only for 𝖾𝗑𝖺𝖼𝗍 _𝖿𝖾𝖺𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 ; optional tolerance cost 𝑐 tol  

> 𝑏

; optional soft squared intervention norm 𝑛 sof t  

> 𝑏,𝜆

and objective 𝐽 sof t  

> 𝑏,𝜆

; hard residual 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑏

(𝜔 ); and any soft residual 𝑟 sof t  

> 𝑏,𝜆

(𝜔 ). 

> 5:

Analyze identifiability: compute the orthonormal basis of  via Proposition 7.2.  

> 6:

Build the diagnostic record: bundle the obstruction, channel norms, budget records, and  certificate.  

> 7:

return diagnostic record. 

Algorithm 2: Budgeted intervention solver, synthesize_intervention .

Require: 𝐷 , 𝜔 , projector 𝑃 , cost metric 𝐶 , feasibility tolerance 𝜂 feas > 0, Tikhonov regularizer 𝜆 > 0 for soft mode. 

Ensure: 𝛿 ⋆, hard cost, tolerance record, soft diagnostic record, 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ), optional 𝑟 sof t  

> 𝑃 ,𝜆

(𝜔 ), feasibility status.  

> 1:

Let 𝑄 be an orthonormal basis and inclusion matrix for 𝑉 𝑃 = im 𝑃 . 

> 2:

Form 𝐴 𝑃 ← 𝐷𝑄 and 𝐶 𝑃 ← 𝑄 ⊤𝐶𝑄 . 

> 3:

Compute 𝐴 𝑃 + and 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) ← 𝜔 − 𝐴 𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 +𝜔 . 

> 4:

if ‖‖‖𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 )‖‖‖ = 0 then  

> 5:

Enter the theorem-level exact-feasible branch.  

> 6:

𝑧 ⋆ ← 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 (𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔 . 

> 7:

𝛿 ⋆ ← 𝑄𝑧 ⋆. 

> 8:

𝑐 hard ← 𝛿 ⋆⊤ 𝐶𝛿 ⋆. 

> 9:

return (𝛿 ⋆, 𝑐 hard , 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ), 𝖾𝗑𝖺𝖼𝗍 _𝖿𝖾𝖺𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 ). 

> 10:

else if ‖‖‖𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 )‖‖‖ ≤ 𝜂 feas then  

> 11:

Enter the tolerance-feasible engineering branch.  

> 12:

Compute 𝑧 ⋆ and 𝛿 ⋆ as above.  

> 13:

𝑐 tol ← 𝛿 ⋆⊤ 𝐶𝛿 ⋆. 

> 14:

𝑐 hard ← +∞ for exact-hard verdicts.  

> 15:

return (𝛿 ⋆, (𝑐 hard , 𝑐 tol ), 𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ), 𝗍𝗈𝗅𝖾𝗋𝖺𝗇𝖼𝖾 _𝖿𝖾𝖺𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 ). 

> 16:

else  

> 17:

Enter the soft Tikhonov branch.  

> 18:

𝑧 ⋆𝜆 ← (𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 + 𝜆 −1 𝐶 𝑃 )−1 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔 . 

> 19:

𝛿 ⋆𝜆 ← 𝑄𝑧 ⋆𝜆 . 

> 20:

𝑟 sof t  

> 𝑃 ,𝜆

(𝜔 ) ← 𝜔 − 𝐴 𝑃 𝑧 ⋆𝜆 . 

> 21:

𝑐 hard ← +∞ . 

> 22:

𝑛 sof t  

> 𝜆

← ‖‖‖𝛿 ⋆𝜆 

‖‖‖ 

> 2
> 𝐶

= 𝛿 ⋆𝜆 ⊤𝐶𝛿 ⋆𝜆 . 

> 23:

𝐽 sof t  

> 𝜆

← 12 𝑛 sof t  

> 𝜆

+ ( 𝜆 ∕2) ‖‖‖𝑟 sof t  

> 𝑃 ,𝜆

(𝜔 )‖‖‖

> 2

. 

> 24:

return (𝛿 ⋆𝜆 , (𝑐 hard , 𝑛 sof t  

> 𝜆

, 𝐽 sof t  

> 𝜆

), (𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ), 𝑟 sof t  

> 𝑃 ,𝜆

(𝜔 )) , 𝗂𝗇𝖿𝖾𝖺𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 _𝗌𝗈𝖿𝗍 _𝖽𝗂𝖺𝗀𝗇𝗈𝗌𝗍𝗂𝖼 ). 

> 25:

end if 

Streaming monitoring. The monitoring pipeline runs the diagnostic pipeline at each time step of a streaming input but reuses cached operators where possible. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 19 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Algorithm 3: Identifiability analyzer, analyze_identifiability .

Require: 𝐷 ∈ ℝ𝑀 ×𝑁 , 𝑂 , singular-value tolerance 𝜂 svd > 0.

Ensure: orthonormal basis 𝐵  of , dim , channel decomposition of 𝐵 , multi-part certificate.  

> 1:

Compute a full SVD or rank-revealing nullspace of 𝐷 : 𝐷 = 𝑈 𝐷 Σ𝐷 𝑉 ⊤𝐷 . 

> 2:

Let 𝑟 = #{ 𝓁 ∶ 𝜎 𝓁 (𝐷 ) > 𝜂 svd } and set 𝑉 ker ← 𝑉 𝐷 [∶ , 𝑟 + 1 ∶ 𝑁 ], including structural zero singular directions.  

> 3:

Compute 𝑂 ′ ← 𝑂𝑉 ker and its SVD 𝑂 ′ = 𝑈 𝑂 ′ Σ𝑂 ′ 𝑉 ⊤𝑂 ′ . 

> 4:

Let 𝑉 0 be a complete basis of ker 𝜂 svd (𝑂 ′), including structural right-null directions omitted by an economy SVD, and set 𝐵  ← 𝑉 ker 𝑉 0. 

> 5:

Decompose each column of 𝐵  into channel components by projecting onto the three primary channels and any optional contract-metadata block.  

> 6:

Verify ‖‖𝐷𝐵 ‖‖, ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖, orthonormality, and the dimension identity of Proposition 7.2.  

> 7:

return (𝐵 , dim , channel decomposition , certificate ).

Algorithm 4: Streaming monitoring. 

Require: fixed cover  , fixed restrictions, fixed budgets, learned generator 𝐺 𝜃 , streaming inputs {𝑥 𝑡 }.

Ensure: stream of (𝜔 (𝑡 ), channel norms (𝑡 ), hard and soft diagnostic budget records (𝑡 )) . 

> 1:

Assemble 𝐷 once.  

> 2:

Cache pseudoinverses and projectors for all standard budgets.  

> 3:

for 𝑡 = 1 , 2, … do  

> 4:

Compute 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ← 𝐺 𝑖,𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 ) for each 𝑖 . 

> 5:

Set 𝑠 (𝑡 ) ← (vec( 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑡 ))) 𝑖 ∈𝐼 and compute 𝜔 (𝑡 ) ← 𝐷𝑠 (𝑡 ). 

> 6:

Compute channel norms and hard and soft diagnostic budget records.  

> 7:

Emit summary.  

> 8:

end for 

8.2. Computational complexity and auditability 

We summarize the time complexity in terms of the total stalk dimension 𝑁 ∶= ∑𝑖 𝑑 𝑖 , the total overlap stalk dimension 𝑀 ∶= ∑(𝑖,𝑗 ) 𝑚 𝑖𝑗 , the number of regions |𝐼 |, and the number of budgets |bud |.The coboundary 𝐷 has dimensions 𝑀 × 𝑁 and is block sparse with (|𝐸 |) nonzero blocks. Sparse storage, assembly, and matrix–vector costs are (nnz( 𝐷 )) , where nnz( 𝐷 ) counts scalar nonzeros in all restriction blocks. This sparse-operation cost becomes (𝑀 + 𝑁 ) only under a local-interpolation sparsity assumption. Computing 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 

costs (𝑀𝑁 ) in the dense regime and (nnz( 𝐷 )) in the sparse regime. For each budget label 𝑏 , budgeted intervention through Algorithm 2 forms the restricted operator 𝐴 𝑃 𝑏 = 𝐷𝑄 𝑏 

with 𝑝 𝑏 ∶= dim 𝑉 𝑃 𝑏 . A dense thin SVD or an equivalent rectangular factorization costs (𝑀𝑝 𝑏 min{ 𝑀, 𝑝 𝑏 }) per budget, in addition to matrix–vector products with 𝜔 and any cost-metric factorization. The dense catalog cost is 

(∑𝑏 ∈bud 𝑀𝑝 𝑏 min{ 𝑀, 𝑝 𝑏 }) . Directly factoring a dense non-identity restricted metric 𝑄 ⊤𝑏 𝐶 𝑏 𝑄 𝑏 adds (𝑝 3

> 𝑏

) unless the factor is cached or structured. Identifiability analysis requires a rank-revealing nullspace computation for 𝐷 and an SVD of 𝑂𝑉 ker . Each analyzed matrix follows the dense compact SVD cost convention (𝑎𝑏 min{ 𝑎, 𝑏 }) .

Diagnostic record and audit trail. Every diagnose call returns a structured diagnostic record containing ‖𝜔 ‖,channel and per-overlap norms, exact-hard feasibility and cost records, separate tolerance and soft records with their residuals, and the identifiability certificate. These fields are the quantities needed to audit the scientific verdict; no additional aggregate score or discrete classification layer is introduced. 

## 9. Experiments 

We evaluate SEAM-Ω in nineteen experiments spanning synthetic PDE conservation laws; random-sinusoid Burgers initial conditions; FNO OOD monitoring; real-world open datasets from the University of California, Irvine (UCI) Machine Learning Repository, namely Metro Interstate Traffic Volume, Air Quality, and Individual Household Electric Power Consumption; and United States Geological Survey (USGS) streamflow at three National Water Information   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 20 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

System (NWIS) sites. The suite also uses synthetic financial multi-regime data and a synthetic industrial multi-zone fault scenario. The experiments are organized into eight groups aligned with the scientific claims that each group evaluates. Aggregate reporting and repeated-run checks follow Appendix E.1. Appendix E records the remaining common configuration and per-experiment settings needed to interpret and reproduce the results. Cross-experiment comparisons use the raw and edge-count-normalized reports introduced next. 

9.1. Reporting obstruction magnitudes 

Raw obstruction magnitudes ‖𝜔 ‖2 retain the units of the overlap stalks and depend on the scale of 𝑠 and on the number and dimensions of the overlaps. Every experiment below reports the raw norm, which records absolute magnitude in physical units. Comparisons across covers of different sizes additionally use the edge-count-normalized report 

|𝐸 |−1∕2 ‖𝜔 ‖2 = (|𝐸 |−1 ∑(𝑖,𝑗 )∈ 𝐸 

‖‖‖𝜔 𝑖𝑗 

‖‖‖

> 2

)1∕2 ,

the root-mean-square (RMS) per-overlap obstruction, defined when |𝐸 | > 0 and controlling for the number of overlaps. 

9.2. Local correctness does not imply admissibility 

9.2.1. Local–global amplitude mismatch 

Setup. We use the cover [0 , 1] = 𝑈 1 ∪ 𝑈 2 ∪ 𝑈 3 with a 10% overlap fraction. Region 𝑈 𝑖 carries the analytic generator 

𝑢 𝑖 (𝑥 ) = 𝐴 𝑖 sin(2 𝜋𝑥 ) with amplitudes 𝐴 1 = 1 .0, 𝐴 2 = 1 .5, and 𝐴 3 = 0 .7. Local explanations carry only a state block. The three regional generators are independently specified and internally exact, making this experiment the controlled realization of Mechanism M1. 

Results. The raw obstruction norm is ‖𝜔 ‖ ≈ 0 .71 and is dominated by the state channel. We assess admissibility-restoring interventions by their budget-specific hard feasibility, residuals, and costs. Under the unrestricted budget, the hard repair residual ‖‖‖𝜔 − 𝐷𝛿 ⋆

> all

‖‖‖ falls below 10 −12 . The closure-revision budget is infeasible because the explanations carry no closure block to absorb the mismatch, whereas the state-revision budget succeeds with cost ‖‖𝛿 ⋆‖‖2 ≈ 0 .50 .The state channel is dominant on both overlaps, and the state-revision budget is the only retained proper account. This verdict agrees with the amplitudes having been specified independently across the three regional generators. 

9.2.2. Zero-floor negative control 

Setup. A valid obstruction measure must report ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 when no inconsistency is present. Using the USGS Potomac second-order autoregressive system, denoted AR(2), we evaluate three conditions on a three-region abstract cover: an identical-model control, which uses identical AR(2) weights across regions; a heterogeneous-seasonal reference, which uses the calibrated seasonal weights from the Potomac streamflow seasonality baseline; and a noise-perturbed identical-model control, which adds independent and identically distributed Gaussian noise at the 10 −8 scale to predictor outputs from otherwise identical models. 

Results. The identical-model control gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0000 ± 0 .0000 . The heterogeneous-seasonal reference gives 

‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0266 ± 0 .0000 and exactly reproduces the Potomac streamflow seasonality baseline. The noise-perturbed identical-model control gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = (2 .71 ± 0 .78) × 10 −8 , well below 10 −6 and several orders of magnitude below the smallest real-world obstruction of 0.0266 from the Potomac streamflow seasonality study. The zero floor is robust to floating-point perturbations at the 10 −8 scale. 

9.2.3. Household-power cross-framework audit 

Setup. We use the UCI Individual Household Electric Power Consumption dataset (Hébrail and Berard, 2012). The target is Global_active_power in kW. Features comprise the cyclical hour represented by sine and cosine, standardized voltage, and standardized reactive power. Separate winter, spring, summer, and autumn models are fitted by three officially maintained baseline frameworks: scikit-learn (SK) LinearRegression (Pedregosa, Varoquaux, Gramfort, Michel, Thirion, Grisel, Blondel, Prettenhofer, Weiss, Dubourg, VanderPlas, Passos, Cournapeau, Brucher, Perrot and Duchesnay, 2011); XGBoost (XGB) XGBRegressor (Chen and Guestrin, 2016); and statsmodels (SM), with ordinary least squares (OLS) implemented by OLS (Seabold and Perktold, 2010). Each seasonal model is trained on an 80% split and evaluated on the held-out 20% . The four seasonal models are wrapped by from_predictor and passed to diagnose on a path cover with overlaps (winter , spring) , (spring , summer) , and (summer , autumn) .  

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 21 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Local accuracy. All three model families achieve mean seasonal 𝑅 2 > 0.999 , meeting the local-accuracy criterion used here. 

Global admissibility audit. SEAM-Ω detects nontrivial obstruction in all three model families: ‖𝜔 ‖SK = 9 .424 ± 0.732 , ‖𝜔 ‖XGB = 9 .391 ± 0 .719 , and ‖𝜔 ‖SM = 9 .424 ± 0 .732 . The state channel is dominant for all three model families, and the dominant overlap is (winter , spring) : The winter–spring transition carries the largest seasonal gradient in domestic electricity consumption. 

Physical and operational interpretation. The obstruction norm is in units of kW ⋅(point-count) 1∕2 , reflecting the 𝐿 2

disagreement across three overlaps with 30 evaluation points per overlap. The global norm corresponds to an RMS disagreement of approximately 9.424∕ √3 ⋅ 30 ≈ 1 .0 kW per evaluation point. An automated demand-response system that switches between seasonal models at the transition would exhibit prediction jumps of this magnitude. 

9.3. Missing closure is recoverable 

9.3.1. Hidden-source recovery for Burgers 

Setup. The true PDE is the inviscid Burgers equation with a hidden Gaussian source: 

𝑢 𝑡 + 12 (𝑢 2)𝑥 = 𝐴 exp(−( 𝑥 − 𝑥 0)2∕(2 𝑤 2)) ,

where 𝐴 = 0 .6, 𝑥 0 = 0 .5, and 𝑤 = 0 .06 . A source-free finite-volume Burgers solver is run on each region, and the local explanation emits a closure-summary block measuring the missing-source residual on the overlap. This block is audited through the closure restriction, while the state-revision budget handles state mismatches. 

Results. The closure-channel recovery module computes the Moore–Penrose projected correction 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 ; under the sign convention, the recovered physical source increment is −𝛿 ⋆𝐶 . The relative closure-channel residual of this projected recovery is ‖‖‖𝜔 closure − 𝐷 𝐶 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 

‖‖‖ ∕ ‖‖‖𝜔 closure ‖‖‖ < 0.05 , equivalently below 5% . The recovered closure peak is ̂𝑥 0 = 0 .501 ,within 0.2% of the true center 𝑥 0 = 0 .5 and displaced by 1.7% of the source width 𝑤 = 0 .06 . Corollary 7.3 gives zero residual under exact image membership; the finite-grid reconstruction above is the projected numerical counterpart of that exact case. The closure channel is dominant on both overlaps. 

Scientific interpretation. For the identifiable closure-summary model used in this experiment, the recovered physical increment −𝛿 ⋆𝐶 is the minimum-norm closure reconstruction. The reconstruction makes the missing-physics hypothesis explicit and provides the recovered source profile together with its projected residual, following the physical interpretation specified in Section 4.3. For the saved pre-repair raw cochain, ‖𝜔 ‖ = 2 .020994 ; the overlap norms are 1.428951 on 𝑈 12 

and 1.429166 on 𝑈 23 . The closure-channel norm is 2.020986 , compared with 0.005873 in the state channel and zero in the observation and optional contract-metadata channels. Thus, the closure channel contributes 99 .9992% of ‖𝜔 ‖2,supporting the closure-dominated diagnostic reading. Figure 6 shows these per-overlap and per-channel summaries of the repair-input 𝜔 .

9.3.2. Conservation-contract detectability 

Setup. Three Burgers regions cover [0 , 1] . The central region 𝑈 2 has an active conservation contract. The repair magnitude used in Theorem 2 and reported here is 𝜖 repair ∶= ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖, the norm of the actual closure-channel vector entering the overlap restriction at the repaired endpoint. This endpoint repair magnitude is distinct from the accumulated absolute repair magnitude 𝜖 abs  

> 𝑞

∶= ∑𝑡 |𝛿 𝑞 (𝑡 )|, because the closure block accumulates signed increments, while the optional metadata block records their magnitudes (Appendix D.1). Regions 𝑈 1 and 𝑈 3 have no conservation repair, so their restricted repair contributions vanish on their incident overlaps. The 1-skeleton of this cover’s nerve is the three-vertex path joining regions 1, 2, and 3 in that order; its two edges correspond to the overlaps 𝑈 12 and 𝑈 23 .

Results. ‖‖‖𝜔 closure 12 

‖‖‖ = 1 .172 and ‖‖‖𝜔 closure 23 

‖‖‖ = 1 .172 . The closure-revision intervention recovers the repair magnitude to within 0.83% relative error. The smallest nonzero singular value of the closure restriction is 𝜎 +min = 2 .828 ; the lower bound in Theorem 2 is 0.128 ; and the observed norm exceeds the bound by a factor of 9.2 under the one-sided zero-contribution setting of Theorem 2.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 22 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy (1, 2) (2, 3)    

> overlap (i, j)
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
> ‖ω‖overlap
> 1.4290 1.4292
> Per-overlap obstruction norm
> 012

‖ω‖channel 

> state closure observation contract metadata
> 0.0059 2.0210 0.0000 0.0000
> Per-channel obstruction norm

Figure 6: Per-overlap and per-channel obstruction summary for hidden-source recovery for Burgers, computed directly from the saved pre-repair raw cochain 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 . The left plot indexes the two overlaps 𝑈 12 and 𝑈 23 of the three-region cover; the right plot indexes the three primary channels and the optional contract-metadata block, which is absent in this experiment and therefore has zero norm. The closure channel contributes 99 .9992% of ‖𝜔 ‖2, while the other channels contribute negligibly. This concentration is the visual signature behind the closure-dominated diagnostic reading. Repair under the closure-revision budget is the minimum-norm closure recovery of Corollary 7.3. 

Parametric sweep setup. We sweep five values of the repair magnitude in Theorem 2, 𝜖 repair = ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖, namely 

𝜖 repair ∈ {0 .05 , 0.10 , 0.20 , 0.30 , 0.50} . This parametric sweep yields 25 configurations, whose run construction is specified in Appendix E.1. The discretization-tolerant criterion is ‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑖𝑗

‖‖‖ ≥ 0.9 ⋅ 𝜎 +min 𝜖 repair with a prespecified 10% 

tolerance. 

Parametric sweep results. All 25 configurations satisfy this criterion. The minimum observed slack across all configurations exceeds 0.9. Both the empirical norm and the lower bound scale approximately linearly with 

𝜖 repair , consistent with the linear structure of the diagnostic. The diagnostic records retain the unadjusted ratios 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑖𝑗

‖‖‖ ∕( 𝜎 +min 𝜖 repair ) alongside the discretization-tolerant result. Figure 7 plots the seed-aggregated empirical 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑖𝑗

‖‖‖ against the theoretical lower bound at the five repair magnitudes. 

9.4. Data–physics conflict attribution 

Setup. The Burgers solver with a correct Gaussian closure prior is run on three overlapping regions. In the sensor-corruption condition, one region’s sensor mean is shifted by 5𝜎 ; in the closure-corruption condition, one region’s closure parameter is biased. The sensor-corruption condition realizes Mechanism M3, and the closure-corruption condition is the matching physics-side control. The budgets compared are the sensor-rejection budget, which reweights sensors, and the closure-revision budget, which shifts closure parameters. This experiment evaluates the soft budget-attribution branch; squared intervention norms and residuals are reported for both injected corruption types under the reporting contract of Definition 3.9. 

Results: sensor corruption. The observation-channel soft squared intervention norm is 𝑛 sof t obs = 0 .08 , the closure-channel counterpart is 𝑛 sof t closure = 1 .47 , and their ratio favors the sensor-rejection budget by a factor of 18 .4. The residual-aware empirical diagnosis is a data conflict. 

Results: closure corruption. The closure-channel soft squared intervention norm is 𝑛 sof t closure = 0 .11 , the observation-channel counterpart is 𝑛 sof t obs = 1 .39 , and their ratio favors the closure-revision budget by a factor of 12 .6. The residual-aware empirical diagnosis is a closure conflict. In both conditions, the budget with the lower squared intervention norm identifies the injected source of disagreement; the diagnostic records retain the corresponding residuals. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 23 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Theorem 2 lower bound σ+min εrepair           

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 Empirical  ‖ωclosure
> ij  ‖ Tight bound y=x
> Pass threshold y= 0.9 xεrepair = 0.05
> εrepair = 0.10
> εrepair = 0.20
> εrepair = 0.30
> εrepair = 0.50

Figure 7: Theorem 2 parametric sweep. All 25 configurations pass, corresponding to a 100% rate. Seed-aggregated observed 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑖𝑗

‖‖‖ as a function of the lower bound 𝜎 +min 𝜖 repair at five values of 𝜖 repair = ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖. With five seeds per value, the plotted points summarize the 25 configurations in the run construction of Appendix E.1. All configurations satisfy the prespecified 

10% discretization-tolerant criterion. Empirical norms can exceed the lower bound because the row-space component of 

𝛿𝑐 𝑞 has components along singular directions associated with singular values larger than 𝜎 +min ; row-space-orthogonal kernel components are annihilated and do not increase the observed obstruction. 

9.5. Blind-closure identifiability 

Setup. The closure block of each region is spanned by two basis functions. A visible function is detected by 𝑂 , whereas an invisible function belongs to ker 𝑂 . We run the identifiability analyzer from Algorithm 3. 

Results. dim  = 1 in the global explanation space. The computed orthonormal basis of  consists of a single vector whose support lies entirely in the closure channel. The corresponding channel fractions are 100% closure and 0% for each of the state, observation, and optional metadata blocks. Observation invisibility satisfies ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖ < 10 −14 . Two closure configurations with identical predicted states and sensor readings, differing only in the blind admissible direction, are constructed and verified to differ by ‖‖𝑠 − 𝑠 ′‖‖ > 0.15 . Together, the constructed pair and the observation-invisibility certificate establish a 1D blind admissible direction. 

9.6. Governing-model discrimination and backend interoperability 

9.6.1. PDE model-form discrimination: Burgers versus advection 

Setup. The true PDE is linear advection, 𝑢 𝑡 + 𝑐𝑢 𝑥 = 0 , with 𝑐 = 0 .5 on [0 , 1] , periodic boundary conditions, and a smooth bump as the initial condition. Two candidate generators are evaluated: finite-volume Burgers and finite-volume linear advection at 𝑐 = 0 .5.

Results. ‖𝜔 ‖Burgers = 0 .84 and ‖𝜔 ‖advection = 0 .031 ; ranking by obstruction selects linear advection with a 96% 

relative obstruction gap. The Burgers obstruction is localized near the steep region of the bump, where the Burgers characteristic speed 𝑢 departs most from the constant advection speed 𝑐 . Both state-only comparisons have state-channel obstruction above the default 𝜏 zero = 10 −6 , but the advection run has substantially lower obstruction. The comparison therefore selects advection as the lower-obstruction model form while retaining its nonzero state-channel diagnostic. 

Observed regime. Across the tested model forms and parameter range, obstruction increases monotonically with model mismatch. The compared quantity is the raw admissibility defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 of Definition 3.7. Because this comparison uses state-only explanations, the reported obstruction lies in the state channel; that obstruction is the raw defect, not a budget-specific residual or an intervention cost. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 24 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

In this experiment, model mismatch specifically denotes the discrepancy between the candidate transport dynamics and the data-generating linear advection dynamics. The correct candidate transports the bump at the constant characteristic speed 𝑐 = 0 .5, whereas the Burgers candidate uses the state-dependent speed 𝑢 ; the difference between the two speeds is largest near the steep portion of the bump, which is also where the overlap defects concentrate. Thus, the value 0.031 for advection represents a small but nonzero residual overlap disagreement at the tested resolution, while the value 0.84 for Burgers records the much larger incompatibility induced by the wrong governing dynamics. The monotone statement is an empirical observation for this controlled comparison and its tested parameter range, not a claim that ‖𝜔 ‖ must be monotone in an arbitrary parametrization of model error. 

9.6.2. Backend interoperability: finite-volume and CT-SEAM generators 

Setup. Two backends produce local explanations on the same three-region Burgers domain. Backend A is a plain finite-volume Burgers generator with zero closure. Backend B is the same solver with an active conservation-theoretic closure implemented by CT-SEAM as described in Appendix D, and with region-varying repair amplitudes. Both outputs are audited with the same cover, restrictions, channel metrics, and intervention catalog. 

Results. The diagnostic-record comparison gives the raw obstruction-norm ratio ‖𝜔 ‖𝐵 ∕ ‖𝜔 ‖𝐴 > 1, confirming that the conservation repair introduces detectable closure-channel disagreement. The channel report assigns the additional signal in Backend B to the closure channel, as expected from its region-varying repair. The diagnostic records report the obstruction, channel, and intervention summaries for both backends. 

9.7. Cross-domain and stochastic-generator evaluations 

9.7.1. Random-sinusoid Burgers stress test 

Setup. The Burgers initial condition is generated as a superposition of 𝑁 sin = 10 random sinusoids with integer frequency 𝑘 𝑛 ∼ Unif{1 , … , 8} and amplitude 𝑎 𝑛 ∼  (0 , 1∕ 𝑘 𝑛 ). The construction adapts the random-sinusoid family used in PDEBench to this ten-wave, Gaussian-amplitude distribution (Takamoto, Praditia, Leiteritz, MacKinlay, Alesiani, Pflüger and Niepert, 2022). The local solver generates all trajectories used in this study; PDEBench supplies methodological precedent rather than experiment data. 

Results. The aggregate run protocol gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .4754 ± 0 .0000 .

9.7.2. Metro traffic seasonality 

Setup. We use the UCI Metro Interstate Traffic Volume dataset (Hogue, 2019). A three-region seasonal cover spans winter, summer, and a transition region, with one AR(2) predictor fitted per region. This study, together with the streamflow and air-quality studies that follow, instantiates Mechanism M2 on measured data. 

Results. The aggregate run protocol gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0973 ± 0 .0000 . The obstruction reflects genuine cross-seasonal mismatch in the AR(2) parameters. 

9.7.3. Potomac streamflow seasonality and multi-site regime comparison 

Potomac streamflow setup. We use USGS streamflow data (U.S. Geological Survey, 2023) from site 01646500 on the Potomac River at the Little Falls Pump Station near Washington, District of Columbia (DC). The dataset covers 2021-10-01 through 2022-09-30 with 365 daily observations. The cover has three hydrological regions, with one AR(2) predictor fitted per region. 

Potomac streamflow results. The aggregate run protocol gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0266 ± 0 .0000 . This norm is the smallest value across the real-world experiments, consistent with the Potomac’s moderate seasonality. 

Multi-site comparison setup. We use three USGS sites with distinct hydrological regimes: 01413500 is the East Branch Delaware River at Margaretville, New York, with Catskill snowmelt and strong seasonality; 01646500 is the Potomac River near Washington, DC, at the Little Falls Pump Station, with moderate seasonality; and 02169500 is the Congaree River at Columbia, South Carolina, with mild southern seasonality. The hypothesis states that the southern site’s obstruction is below the maximum northern-site value. 

Multi-site comparison results. ‖𝜔 ‖01413500 = 0.054 , ‖𝜔 ‖02169500 = 0.037 , and ‖𝜔 ‖01646500 = 0.027 . The hypothesis is supported: The southern site is below the northern-site maximum. The strong-seasonality site carries   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 25 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

the largest obstruction, whereas the moderate- and mild-seasonality sites do not follow the stated label order under a common configuration. 

9.7.4. Air-quality temporal consistency 

Setup. We use the UCI Air Quality dataset (De Vito, 2016), which contains 9357 hourly records of the four pollutant channels CO, C 6H6, NO 𝑥 , and NO 2 from an Italian monitoring station. The cover has three temporal regions, with one OLS predictor fitted per region. 

Results. The fixed-data protocol gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .2850 for the UCI dataset and preprocessing protocol. The computation is deterministic. The higher ‖𝜔 ‖ relative to streamflow is consistent with the stronger seasonality of air quality, governed by temperature-dependent photochemistry. 

9.7.5. Financial regime and industrial fault detection 

Financial regime detection. Synthetic log returns are generated across bull, bear, and sideways regimes. The regime-dependent volatility of those returns is motivated by a selected subset of the stylized facts documented by Cont (2001). The generator represents this selected subset of asset-return properties. The heterogeneous case yields 

‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0137 ± 0 .0007 , with the closure channel serving as a residual-volatility proxy and dominating the aggregate result. The bull–bear overlap contributes ≈ 57% of the total obstruction; the bear–sideways overlap contributes ≈ 43% .The identical-model control gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .

Industrial multi-zone fault detection. We simulate a synthetic three-zone serial process with one OLS regressor per zone and inject a 0.3𝜎 step fault into the midstream zone halfway through the evaluation window. Under normal operation, ‖𝜔 ‖normal = 0 .491 ± 0 .199 ; under fault injection, ‖𝜔 ‖fault = 2 .039 ± 0 .501 , an increase by a factor of 4.1.The state channel dominates the aggregate fault response, correctly attributing the inconsistency to process-variable changes rather than to a closure or sensor conflict. The identical-zone control gives ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .000 .

9.8. Learned-generator monitoring 

9.8.1. Controlled predictor perturbation 

Setup. Starting from the USGS Potomac AR(2) predictors calibrated in the Potomac streamflow seasonality study, we perturb the spring predictor weights in 10 random directions with magnitudes 𝜎 ∈ {0 , 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.20 , 0.40 , 0.80 , 1.60} 

and compute ‖𝜔 ‖.

Results. We define the empirical monotonicity fraction as the proportion of adjacent perturbation-level pairs for which 

‖𝜔 ‖ strictly increases. This fraction is 1.00 ± 0 .00 under the aggregate run protocol. The zero-perturbation floor is 

‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .0266 , equal to the Potomac streamflow seasonality baseline. The diagnostic is strictly monotone on this dataset across all tested magnitudes and directions. This behavior is empirical monotonicity in perturbation magnitude for this dataset and sweep, not a general guarantee. Figure 8 plots ‖𝜔 ‖ as a function of 𝜎 , with mean ± standard deviation across the 10 perturbation directions. 

9.8.2. FNO OOD monitoring 

Setup. An FNO (Li et al., 2021) is trained on a distribution of Burgers initial conditions and evaluated on OOD covariate-shifted inputs. The FNO-1D architecture has width 64 , four spectral layers, mode cutoff 𝑚 = 16 , Gaussian error linear unit activation, and approximately 0.65 million parameters. The streaming obstruction 𝜔 (𝑡 ) is computed from the FNO regional explanations and their overlap restrictions. The study is the experimental realization of Mechanism M4. A high-resolution reference solver independently supplies the 𝐿 2 prediction-error coordinate in the correlation analysis. 

Dataset. The dataset represents the 1D Burgers equation on  = [0 , 1] over 𝑡 ∈ [0 , 0.5] , with viscosity 𝜈 = 0 .01 and periodic boundary conditions. The spatial and temporal grids have 𝑁 𝑥 = 128 and 𝑁 𝑡 = 100 points, respectively. The training-distribution initial conditions are superpositions of three sinusoids: 

𝑢 0(𝑥 ) = 

> 3

∑

> 𝓁 =1

𝑎 𝓁 sin(2 𝜋𝑞 𝓁 𝑥 + 𝜙 𝓁 ).

Here 𝑎 𝓁 ∼ Unif[−0 .5, 0.5] , 𝑞 𝓁 ∈ {1 , 2, 3} chosen uniformly, and 𝜙 𝓁 ∼ Unif[0 , 2𝜋 ].                        

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 26 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 010 −2 10 −1 10 0
> Perturbation magnitude σ
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> Raw obstruction norm  ‖ω‖
> Mean obstruction norm ±1 SD (10 directions)
> Figure 8: Inconsistency detection shows that ‖𝜔 ‖scales monotonically with injected perturbation magnitude. Starting from the USGS Potomac AR(2) predictors calibrated in the Potomac streamflow seasonality study, the spring predictor weights are perturbed in 10 random directions with magnitudes 𝜎 ∈ {0 ,0.05 ,0.10 ,0.20 ,0.40 ,0.80 ,1.60} . The curve shows the mean
> ‖𝜔 ‖across directions; error bars and the shaded band show ±one standard deviation. The vertical axis reports the raw obstruction norm. Across the full range, the empirical monotonicity fraction is 1.00 ± 0 .00 under the aggregate run protocol.

Training. Training uses 𝑁 train = 1000 trajectories, a batch size of 32 , the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 

10 −3 , and cosine annealing over 200 epochs. The loss is the relative 𝐿 2 error over the (𝑥, 𝑡 ) grid. Repeated-run training and aggregation follow Appendix E.1, with all other settings held fixed. 

OOD shift families. Three parametric shifts modify the training initial-condition distribution. The frequency shift uses 𝑞 𝓁 ∈ {4 , 5, 6} instead of {1 , 2, 3} . The amplitude shift uses 𝑎 𝓁 ∼ Unif[−1 .5, 1.5] instead of Unif[−0 .5, 0.5] . The spectral-truncation shift uses a band-limited initial condition truncated to four Fourier modes, with random coefficients drawn from Unif[−0 .5, 0.5] . Each shift family contains 𝑁 ood = 500 test trajectories. For the auxiliary visualization in Figure 9, a separate 20-level sweep uses 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1] as a path coordinate from the training distribution at 𝛼 = 0 to a fixed OOD endpoint at 𝛼 = 1 . This seed-averaged sweep is distinct from the per-trajectory endpoint evaluations of the three shift families. 

Reference solver. A high-resolution finite-volume scheme uses 𝑁 ref  

> 𝑥

= 1024 , 𝑁 ref  

> 𝑡

= 800 , and Courant–Friedrichs– Lewy (CFL) number 0.4. Reference solutions are restricted to the FNO grid by spectral downsampling. The relative 

𝐿 ∞ residual with respect to an even higher-resolution run is below 5 × 10 −4 .

SEAM-Ω cover. The cover has three temporal regions 𝑈 1 = [0 , 0.2] , 𝑈 2 = [0 .15 , 0.35] , and 𝑈 3 = [0 .30 , 0.5] , with two overlaps. Each region’s local generator is the FNO, advanced from initial conditions sampled at the region’s start time. The restrictions are identity maps on the overlap-time intervals, with spatial averaging at 𝑛 eval = 8 equispaced points. 

Reported statistics. For each shift family, we record the per-trajectory pair (‖‖𝜔 (𝑡 f )‖‖ , ‖‖‖𝑢 FNO (𝑡 f ) − 𝑢 ref (𝑡 f )‖‖‖𝐿 2 ) at the final time 𝑡 f = 0 .5. Each family therefore yields a sample of 𝑁 ood pairs. The reported statistics are the Pearson correlation 𝑟 , the Spearman rank correlation 𝜌 , and the 95% bootstrap confidence interval (CI) for 𝑟 from 1000 bootstrap resamples, with run-wise aggregation specified in Appendix E.1.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 27 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0                  

> OOD interpolation coefficient α
> 5.50 5.75 6.00 6.25 6.50 6.75 7.00
> Mean obstruction norm  ‖ω(tf)‖  (a)
> 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6
> Mean obstruction norm ‖ω(tf)‖
> 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
> Mean relative FNO  L 2 error  (b)
> 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30
> Mean relative FNO  L 2 error
> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> OOD interpolation coefficient α
> SEAM-Ωnorm Relative FNO L2error

Figure 9: FNO OOD monitoring in the auxiliary 20-level interpolation sweep. The left plot shows the mean SEAM-Ω

obstruction norm and mean relative FNO 𝐿 2 prediction error as functions of the OOD interpolation coefficient 𝛼 ; shaded envelopes show ± one standard deviation over seeds. The right plot shows the same seed-averaged quantities, colored by 

𝛼 . Low-𝛼 cases occupy the lower-left corner, and increasing distribution shift moves the sequence toward the upper-right corner. The within-sweep correlation 𝑟 = 0 .953 is a visualization-level statistic for the 20 seed-averaged points; that statistic is distinct from the headline per-trajectory Pearson and Spearman correlations across the three shift families reported in Section 9.8.2. 

Results. Across the three OOD families, the Pearson correlation between ‖‖𝜔 (𝑡 f )‖‖ and the 𝐿 2 prediction error is 

𝑟 = 0 .995 ± 0 .003 , with Spearman 𝜌 = 0 .987 ± 0 .005 . The associated 95% bootstrap CIs fall within [0 .991 , 0.998] .Across the three tested Burgers–FNO shift families, 𝜔 is a strong regime-shift monitoring signal. 

Comparison to confidence-based monitoring. We compare 𝜔 with per-trajectory predictive variance from the separate five-member FNO ensemble specified in Appendix E.1. The Pearson correlation between ensemble variance and 𝐿 2 error is 𝑟 var = 0 .71 ± 0 .04 on the same OOD test sets, a substantially weaker signal than 𝜔 . Ensemble variance also requires five times the computation of a single FNO, whereas 𝜔 (𝑡 ) requires one FNO forward pass per region with one coboundary multiplication. 

9.9. Ablations, robustness, and scalability 

9.9.1. Cover-sensitivity ablation 

Evaluation points per overlap. Varying 𝑛 eval ∈ {1 , 2, 3, 5} with abstract identity restrictions causes ‖𝜔 ‖ to scale as √𝑛 eval , consistent with the identity restriction contributing one independent dimension per evaluation point. 

Number of regions. Varying 𝑛 𝑟 ∈ {2 , 3, 4} leaves the per-overlap disagreement stable, while ‖𝜔 ‖2 scales approximately linearly with the number of overlaps |𝐸 |; equivalently, ‖𝜔 ‖ scales approximately as √|𝐸 |. The per-overlap disagreement metric |𝐸 |−1∕2 ‖𝜔 ‖ is therefore a region-count-invariant summary. 

9.9.2. Baseline comparison between naive metrics and SEAM-Ω

Setup. We compare SEAM-Ω against two naive cross-region disagreement metrics in the metro traffic seasonality, Potomac streamflow seasonality, and air-quality temporal-consistency studies: cross-prediction root-mean-square error (RMSE) at the overlap evaluation points and mean absolute pairwise difference. Both are normalized by the mean prediction magnitude. 

Results. SEAM-Ω orders the three datasets by decreasing ‖𝜔 ‖ as air quality, traffic, and streamflow, with respective values 0.2850 , 0.0973 , and 0.0266 . Normalized cross-prediction RMSE orders the same datasets as air quality, streamflow, and traffic, with respective values 0.4512 , 0.3270 , and 0.1572 . That baseline therefore matches SEAM-Ω

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 28 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

on the largest case and reverses the ordering of traffic and streamflow. This ordering difference is descriptive rather than a performance ranking because the three datasets do not supply a ground-truth order of inconsistency. The scalar baselines summarize overall disagreement, whereas SEAM-Ω also retains channel attribution, budgeted repair analysis, and identifiability. 

9.9.3. GPU implementation check 

The GPU coboundary is tested on synthetic problems with |𝐼 | = 32 regions and 𝑑 𝑖 = 10 3 per region. GPU and CPU 𝜔 agree to within a relative tolerance of 10 −10 . Per-call wall time on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU is below 5 ms 

for the matrix–vector product; the SVD dominates the total runtime as in the CPU regime, but large-scale runs require a rank-revealing truncated approximation that captures all singular values above the chosen tolerance before the projection is treated as exact. 

## 10. Related work 

SEAM connects four strands of literature: sheaf-theoretic consistency; physics-informed learning, neural operators, and domain decomposition; identifiability in inverse problems; and model discrepancy together with distribution-shift monitoring. The comparison below focuses on how each strand treats overlap agreement, repair, observational ambiguity, or shift. 

10.1. Sheaf-theoretic signal processing and consistency 

Robinson (2014) systematized the cellular-sheaf formalism for signal processing, while the thesis of Curry (2014) provides a foundational treatment of sheaves, cosheaves, and their applications. The exposition by Ghrist (2014) introduced the formalism to an applied audience, and Bredon (1997) provides the classical reference for sheaf theory and cohomology via derived functors. At the level of coupled scientific models, Robinson (2017a) shows how sheaves assemble interacting local models into systems of equations, including dynamical systems and PDEs, whereas Hansen and Ghrist (2021) apply sheaves to opinion dynamics, providing a nontrivial example of restriction maps as scientific objects. In a distinct application area, Abramsky and Brandenburger (2011) use the failure of global-section existence as the local-to-global obstruction that characterizes contextuality. SEAM shares the obstruction viewpoint, but its local objects are structured scientific explanations, and its operational outputs are channel reports, repairs, and identifiability certificates. For heterogeneous measurements, Robinson (2017b) develops sheaves as a sensor-integration data structure with consistency and fusion tools, whereas Robinson (2020) formalizes a consistency radius for locally supplied, potentially noisy assignments. That radius is a scalar summary of the same overlap disagreement that SEAM-Ω keeps as a cochain and resolves into channel and overlap components. In machine learning, Hansen and Gebhart (2020) formulate neural networks whose message passing is defined on a specified cellular sheaf, while Bodnar, Giovanni, Chamberlain, Lió and Bronstein (2022) parameterize and learn the sheaf structure for heterophilic graph learning. Both constructions use sheaf-Laplacian diffusion, whose algebraic background comes from the spectral theory of the sheaf Laplacian (Hansen and Ghrist, 2019) and the broader graph Hodge-Laplacian framework (Lim, 2020). These constructions read the sheaf Laplacian as a diffusion operator inside a learning objective. SEAM instead places the same local-to-global algebra on heterogeneous scientific explanations through typed restriction maps, and uses channel-resolved disagreement for diagnosis and intervention. 

Explanation-admissibility synthesis. SEAM-Ω builds on global-section and assignment-consistency ideas by treating a structured scientific explanation as the compared object. The stalks of the explanation sheaf separate state, closure, and observation channels, with optional contract metadata, and the geometry-defined restriction maps keep overlap semantics auditable. The resulting obstruction feeds budgeted hypothesis tests and an identifiability quotient. 

10.2. Physics-informed learning, neural operators, and domain decomposition 

PINNs embed differential-equation residuals and associated conditions in training objectives (Raissi et al., 2019), while universal differential equations place trainable components inside differential-equation models (Rackauckas et al., 2020). Both sit within the broader physics-informed machine learning program (Karniadakis, Kevrekidis, Lu, Perdikaris, Wang and Yang, 2021). Studies of PINN optimization in difficult PDE regimes motivate complementary validation of solution behavior alongside the soft physics-residual objective (Krishnapriyan, Gholami, Zhe, Kirby and Mahoney, 2021). Domain-decomposed PINNs directly address interface coupling. The cPINN formulation enforces flux   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 29 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

and average-solution conditions at discrete subdomain interfaces, XPINNs generalize the construction to space–time decompositions, and FBPINNs use compactly supported networks on overlapping subdomains (Jagtap et al., 2020; Jagtap and Karniadakis, 2021; Moseley et al., 2023). Neural operators (Kovachki et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2021) learn solution maps; the FNO (Li et al., 2021) supplies the specific spectral configuration used in the FNO OOD monitoring study. Interface assembly is already central to these methods, and SEAM applies the same assembly logic to structured explanations emitted by heterogeneous generators. Chen, Xu, Xu, Gutiérrez, Narra and McComb (2025) also demonstrate that neural operators can violate the physical principle of locality, and propose a data decomposition that restricts predictions to a finite domain of dependence. This locality constraint acts inside the learned generator. SEAM’s overlap audit acts on the explanations emitted by any generator. Classical domain-decomposition methods for PDEs (Quarteroni and Valli, 1999) decompose a global problem into subproblems on overlapping or non-overlapping subdomains; iterative Schwarz, Dirichlet–Neumann, and Robin–Robin methods enforce interface conditions through iteration on the trace mismatch. The trace mismatch is, formally, a single-overlap version of 𝜔 . SEAM turns this mismatch into a diagnostic output, accepts data-driven generators alongside PDE solvers, and augments the interface report with channel decomposition, budgeted hypothesis tests, and identifiability. 

Generator integration. Domain-decomposed PINNs jointly train local networks to produce one PDE solution, with interface quantities appearing as solution constraints or loss terms. SEAM applies a common audit to explanations from PINNs, operators, classical solvers, and regressors, and uses channel-resolved overlap defects to test and compare repair hypotheses. A PINN, a DeepONet, or an FNO can therefore be wrapped as a SEAM local generator. The FNO OOD correlation result in Section 9.8.2 demonstrates this capability: SEAM monitors a learned operator without modifying the operator’s parameters. 

10.3. Identifiability in inverse problems 

Identifiability analysis in inverse problems and parameter estimation has a long history. Bellman and Åström (1970) introduced the structural-identifiability question for dynamical systems, and Walter and Pronzato (1997) systematized structural and practical identifiability for parametric models. Profile-likelihood analysis of partially observed dynamical systems demonstrates how structural and practical non-identifiability appear in finite-data inference (Raue, Kreutz, Maiwald, Bachmann, Schilling, Klingmüller and Timmer, 2009). SEAM-Ω specializes this question to admissible scientific explanations: The blind admissible subspace  = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 contains directions that preserve overlap agreement while remaining invisible to the current observation map, and the quotient  contains the observable admissible classes. 

10.4. Model discrepancy and distribution-shift monitoring 

Two traditions quantify the gap between a model and the reality the model describes. Bayesian discrepancy modeling calibrates that gap as a statistical object, whereas shift monitoring detects the gap opening under streaming inputs. 

Bayesian model discrepancy. Kennedy and O’Hagan (2001) model the gap between a computer model and observations as a Gaussian-process discrepancy term, calibrated jointly with the model parameters. This Bayesian discrepancy model is the closest probabilistic analog of 𝜔 because the discrepancy term provides a structured account of where the model fails to match reality. Ignoring or misspecifying that discrepancy can confound physical parameters and produce biased, overconfident inference (Brynjarsdóttir and O’Hagan, 2014), a caution that also motivates SEAM’s separation of closure, observation, and blind directions. SEAM provides a deterministic, multi-channel, local-to-global counterpart: The framework decomposes discrepancy across an explanation sheaf and reports the obstruction cochain. 

Consistency-based diagnosis and data reconciliation. Constraint-relaxation methods diagnose inconsistent model–data collections by identifying which assumptions must be relaxed (Hegde, Li, Oreluk, Packard and Frenklach, 2018), while process data reconciliation adjusts measurements to satisfy declared balance equations, and uses residuals to identify gross errors (Narasimhan and Jordache, 1999). Consistency-based diagnosis similarly asks which component assumptions can account for a conflict (Reiter, 1987). SEAM applies this logic to typed regional explanations: Budget subspaces state the permitted revisions, and exact feasibility determines which accounts survive. 

Streaming shift detection. OOD detection, covariate-shift detection, and streaming model monitoring are active areas. Concept-drift methods detect and adapt to changes in evolving supervised streams (Gama, Zliobaite, Bifet,   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 30 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Pechenizkiy and Bouchachia, 2014), while classical sequential change detection includes the cumulative sum statistic (Page, 1954). Confidence scores supply a foundational OOD baseline (Hendrycks and Gimpel, 2017), although modern neural-network probabilities may require explicit calibration (Guo, Pleiss, Sun and Weinberger, 2017). Dataset-shift detectors instead compare test samples or distributions with the training distribution; for example, Rabanser, Günnemann and Lipton (2019) evaluate two-sample and domain-discrimination approaches for detecting and characterizing dataset shift. Predictive confidence is another monitoring signal, but its calibration can degrade under shift (Ovadia, Fertig, Ren, Nado, Sculley, Nowozin, Dillon, Lakshminarayanan and Snoek, 2019). 

Admissibility monitoring. SEAM monitors explanation-admissibility directly from model outputs, complementing input-distribution shift detectors. Shifts that break overlap admissibility produce channel-attributed signals, while admissibility-preserving gauge shifts leave the signal invariant. 

## 11. Discussion 

11.1. Design choices and scope of SEAM-Ω

Three modeling choices delimit the claims of SEAM-Ω.

Finite-dimensional linear setting. SEAM-Ω uses vector-space stalks, linear restriction maps, and a matrix coboundary, yielding the closed-form diagnostic and intervention operators proved here. 

Geometry-defined restrictions. Restrictions are constructed from problem geometry, keeping 𝐷 transparent as a scientific object. Learned restriction maps would require their own identifiability and validation analysis. 

Pairwise-overlap complex. SEAM-Ω uses only pairwise overlaps, represented by the 1-skeleton of the nerve. Accordingly, the guarantees of SEAM-Ω concern pairwise compatibility and do not establish higher-order overlap consistency. 

11.2. Interpretation and operational responses 

The following six properties state what the obstruction resolves and connect each diagnostic pattern to an operational response. 

Gauge invariance and blind directions. A simultaneous shift 𝑠 ↦ 𝑠 + 𝑣 with 𝑣 ∈ ker 𝐷 leaves 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 unchanged. If the shift is also in ker 𝑂 , the direction 𝑣 lies in  and is invisible to current sensors. The identifiability report records this unresolved direction through dim .

Restriction-visible repairs. If the repaired endpoint’s conservation-redistribution repair vector has a component in 

ker 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

, that component is removed by the overlap restriction. The projected form of Theorem 2, Eq. 9, therefore measures the row-space-visible repair component; row-space alignment recovers Eq. 8. A large gap between ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖

and ‖‖‖Πrow( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒 )

𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖, or a non-negligible kernel-component norm ‖‖‖(I − Π row( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒 )

)𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖, signals the need for a full-column-rank closure restriction or a repair operator aligned with the relevant row space, as in the CT-SEAM experiments of Remark 7.4. 

Localization resolution. A discrepancy whose true spatial support is smaller than the finest overlap is averaged into uniformly distributed 𝜔 𝑖𝑗 components across the overlaps containing that support. SEAM reports ‖𝜔 ‖ > 0 at overlap resolution. Comparable neighboring norms with no dominant overlap identify where a refined cover will add localization power. 

Residual-aware observation attribution. Observation-channel attribution is interpreted from the channel norm together with the budget residual rather than from that norm alone. A low-norm but high-residual sensor-rejection record therefore remains unresolved. 

Budget ambiguity and catalog dependence. When several proper budgets are exact-feasible, the verdict retains all of those budgets rather than using cost to force a causal choice. Soft records with similar intervention magnitudes are likewise reported as ambiguous, with their residuals retained in the diagnostic record. Retention is also conditional on   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 31 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

the declared catalog. Exact feasibility eliminates only accounts that were stated, so a cause absent from the catalog is neither tested nor excluded, making a single retained budget as specific as the catalog that produced that budget. 

Overlap consistency and absolute accuracy. The obstruction norm ‖𝜔 ‖ compares neighboring regional explanations with each other rather than with a reference solution. With the cover, restriction maps, discretization, and channel scaling held fixed, the norm aggregates the overlap-wise differences between the restricted explanations, thereby reporting mutual agreement rather than correctness. Under that reading, ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 certifies agreement on overlaps. Absolute-error checks on regions with ground truth provide the complementary test for shared biases that preserve overlap agreement. The FNO OOD monitoring study in Section 9.8.2 evaluates both overlap consistency and reference-solver error. 

## 12. Conclusion 

We introduced SEAM as a generator-agnostic paradigm that treats the global admissibility of scientific explanations as a local-to-global gluing problem, with SEAM-Ω as its finite explanation-sheaf instantiation. Starting from structured regional explanations with state, closure, and observation channels plus optional contract metadata, SEAM-Ω restricts neighboring explanations to their overlaps and assembles their disagreements into the 1-cochain 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 . The channel and overlap components of 𝜔 resolve that disagreement by entry and by channel rather than collapsing the cochain into a single score, while the budget-specific images im( 𝐷𝑃 ) determine repair feasibility. Budgeted preimages then test allowable repair hypotheses: A declared account is refuted when the revisions that account permits cannot remove the obstruction, and priced when those revisions can. Residual-aware soft records provide separately reported empirical attribution when exact feasibility fails. The blind admissible subspace ker 𝐷 ∩ker 𝑂 separates inconsistency from what current observations cannot identify, and the streaming 𝜔 (𝑡 ) supplies an empirical consistency signal under distribution shift. The finite-dimensional result suite provides guarantees for minimum-cost intervention and conservation-contract detectability, with companion identifiability and closure-recovery results. The resulting algorithms assemble 𝐷 , compute budgeted interventions and a basis of , and emit an auditable diagnostic record. Nineteen experiments across synthetic PDEs, FNO OOD monitoring, four open datasets, and synthetic financial and industrial systems jointly show that locally accurate or physically plausible generators can remain globally inadmissible, that closure-restricted repair recovers the injected closure sources, and that channel-resolved obstruction distinguishes and monitors multiple failure modes. A zero-obstruction control, a monotone response to injected predictor perturbations, cross-domain channel attribution, and strong correlation between streaming obstruction and FNO prediction error support these findings. SEAM-Ω makes overlap consistency exactly certifiable: 𝜔 = 0 if and only if neighboring restrictions agree. The framework turns violations into auditable diagnoses and interventions, so that explanation-admissibility becomes a tractable global explanation-consistency audit for scientific machine learning.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 32 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

## CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Gnankan Landry Regis N’guessan: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Validation, Visualization, Writing – Original draft, Writing – Review and editing. Bum Jun Kim: Formal analysis, Visualization, Supervision, Validation, Writing – Review and editing. 

## Funding 

This work was supported through doctoral training funding provided to Gnankan Landry Regis N’guessan by the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences Data Science Doctoral Program and the Nelson Mandela African Institution of Science and Technology. 

## Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

## Acknowledgments 

Gnankan Landry Regis N’guessan thanks his doctoral supervisor and the Axiom Research Group for sustained discussion of the framework. 

## Data and code availability 

The third-party datasets analyzed in this study are publicly available from the sources listed in Appendix E.2. UCI data are released under CC BY 4.0, and USGS data are in the public domain under Section 105 of Title 17 of the United States Code. The common experiment configuration, data sources, and preprocessing are specified in Appendix E. The source code, configuration files, generated synthetic and PDE cases, trained FNO checkpoints, seed-resolved outputs, diagnostic records, pinned environment specifications, and the publication-figure pipeline are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 33 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

## A. List of notation 

Table A.1 lists the symbols used throughout the paper. Sans-serif denotes formal named constants in definitions, equations, and algorithms, such as 𝖠𝗅𝗅𝗈𝗐𝖢𝗅𝗈𝗌𝗎𝗋𝖾 and 𝗀𝗅𝗈𝖻𝖺𝗅𝗅𝗒 _𝖺𝖽𝗆𝗂𝗌𝗌𝗂𝖻𝗅𝖾 ; monospace denotes literal algorithmic identifiers. 

Table A.1 

List of notation. Symbol Meaning 

 ⊆ ℝ𝑑 computational domain 

 = ( 𝑈 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 finite cover indexed by regions 𝐼 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 , 𝐸 pairwise overlap and nerve-edge set 

𝐹 finite explanation sheaf 

𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖 ), 𝐹 (𝑈 𝑖𝑗 ) region and overlap stalks 

𝑒 𝑖 = ( 𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑜 𝑖 , 𝜖 𝑖 ) local explanation with three primary channels and optional contract metadata 

𝑠 = (vec( 𝑒 𝑖 )) 𝑖 ∈𝐼 stack of local explanations; a 0-cochain 

𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 restriction from region 𝑖 to overlap 𝑈 𝑖𝑗 

𝐶 0(𝐹 ), 𝐶 1(𝐹 ) region and overlap cochain spaces 

𝑑 0, 𝐷 coboundary operator and its matrix 

𝜔 = 𝑑 0𝑠 = 𝐷𝑠 raw admissibility defect; a 1-cochain 

𝜔 𝑖𝑗 , 𝜔 ∙ overlap and channel components of 𝜔 𝑃 , 𝑉 𝑃 budget projector and allowed correction subspace 

𝑟 hard  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ) hard budget-feasibility residual 

𝐶, ‖𝛿 ‖2 

> 𝐶

positive-definite cost metric and intervention cost 

𝛿 ⋆ minimum-cost admissibility correction 

𝐷 𝐶 , 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 closure-channel coboundary block and minimum-norm closure correction 

𝑂 observation map 

 = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 blind admissible subspace 

 = ker 𝐷 ∕ observable admissible quotient 

𝐵  orthonormal basis matrix for 

𝜖 repair closure-repair norm entering an overlap; distinct from accumulated repair metadata 

𝜎 +min smallest nonzero singular value 

𝜂 feas , 𝜂 svd feasibility and singular-value tolerances 

𝜏 zero zero-obstruction tolerance 

(⋅) asymptotic complexity notation; distinct from the observation map 𝑂 

## B. Proofs 

This appendix collects the proofs of the two theorems and their companion proposition and corollary, together with the auxiliary pseudoinverse identities that those proofs use. 

B.1. Pseudoinverse identities used throughout 

We collect the standard Moore–Penrose identities used in Section 7. For a real 𝑚 × 𝑛 matrix 𝐴 , the Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse 𝐴 + is the unique matrix satisfying the following four conditions: 

𝐴𝐴 +𝐴 = 𝐴 (MP1) , 𝐴 +𝐴𝐴 + = 𝐴 + (MP2) ,

(𝐴𝐴 +)⊤ = 𝐴𝐴 + (MP3) , (𝐴 +𝐴 )⊤ = 𝐴 +𝐴 (MP4) .

The following identities are immediate consequences: 

Lemma B.1. 𝐴𝐴 + is the orthogonal projector onto im 𝐴 . 𝐴 +𝐴 is the orthogonal projector onto (ker 𝐴 )⟂. Equivalently, 

I − 𝐴 +𝐴 is the orthogonal projector onto ker 𝐴 .

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 34 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Proof. By identity MP3, 𝐴𝐴 + is symmetric. By identity MP1, (𝐴𝐴 +)2 = 𝐴𝐴 +𝐴𝐴 + = 𝐴𝐴 +, so the matrix is idempotent and hence an orthogonal projector. The image of 𝐴𝐴 + is im 𝐴 . Clearly, im( 𝐴𝐴 +) ⊆ im 𝐴 , and for 𝑣 = 𝐴𝑢 ∈ im 𝐴 , we have 𝐴𝐴 +𝑣 = 𝐴𝐴 +𝐴𝑢 = 𝐴𝑢 = 𝑣 , so im( 𝐴𝐴 +) = im 𝐴 . The statement about 𝐴 +𝐴 is analogous. 

Lemma B.2 (Minimum-norm preimage) . For 𝑏 ∈ im 𝐴 , the set {𝑥 ∶ 𝐴𝑥 = 𝑏 } has a unique minimum-norm element, given by 𝐴 +𝑏 ∈ (ker 𝐴 )⟂.Proof. The preimage set is the affine subspace 𝑥 0 + ker 𝐴 for any one preimage 𝑥 0. The minimum-norm element with respect to the Euclidean norm is the orthogonal projection of 0 onto this affine subspace, which is the unique element in 

(ker 𝐴 )⟂. By Lemma B.1, 𝐴 +𝑏 ∈ (ker 𝐴 )⟂, and 𝐴𝐴 +𝑏 = 𝑏 since 𝑏 ∈ im 𝐴 . Hence, 𝐴 +𝑏 is the desired element. 

B.2. Theorem 1: detailed proof 

Theorem (Minimum-cost budgeted intervention) . Let 𝑃 be the orthogonal projector onto a closed subspace 

𝑉 𝑃 ⊆ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ), let 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 ∶ 𝑉 𝑃 ↪ 𝐶 0(𝐹 ) be the inclusion, and let 𝐶 ≻ 0 on 𝐶 0(𝐹 ). Set 𝐴 𝑃 ∶= 𝐷𝑃 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 and 𝐶 𝑃 ∶= 𝜄 ⊤𝑉 𝑃 𝐶𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 .The problem min 𝛿 12 𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 subject to 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 = 𝜔 and (I − 𝑃 )𝛿 = 0 is feasible if and only if 𝜔 ∈ im 𝐴 𝑃 ; in the feasible case, the unique minimizer is 

𝛿 ⋆ = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 (𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔. 

The reported squared intervention cost is 

‖‖𝛿 ⋆‖‖2 

> 𝐶

= 𝜔 ⊤(𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔, 

while the optimum of the quadratic objective is half this value. For 𝜆 > 0, the soft restricted solution is 

𝛿 ⋆𝜆 = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 (𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 + 𝜆 −1 𝐶 𝑃 )−1 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔. 

For the same ambient cost metric 𝐶 , if 𝑉 𝑃 1 ⊆ 𝑉 𝑃 2 and both hard problems are feasible, the reported squared hard costs are antitone in the budget. No such conclusion is asserted for two unrelated budget-specific metrics. The repair convention is 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝑃 𝛿 ⋆.Proof. Feasibility argument. The constraint (I − 𝑃 )𝛿 = 0 is 𝛿 ∈ 𝑉 𝑃 . Combined with 𝐷𝑃 𝛿 = 𝜔 , the feasible set is 

𝑉 𝑃 ∩ ( 𝐷𝑃 |𝑉 𝑃 )−1 (𝜔 ) = 𝑉 𝑃 ∩ 𝐴 −1  

> 𝑃

(𝜔 ), nonempty if and only if 𝜔 ∈ im 𝐴 𝑃 .

Closed-form argument. Working in 𝑉 𝑃 , write 𝛿 = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝑧 for 𝑧 ∈ 𝑉 𝑃 . The objective becomes 12 𝑧 ⊤𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 , which is strictly convex on 𝑉 𝑃 because 𝐶 𝑃 ≻ 0. The constraint is 𝐴 𝑃 𝑧 = 𝜔 . The Lagrangian is 𝐿 (𝑧, 𝜇 ) ∶= 12 𝑧 ⊤𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 − 𝜇 ⊤(𝐴 𝑃 𝑧 − 𝜔 ).Stationarity gives 𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 = 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜇 , so 𝑧 = 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜇 . Substituting into the constraint yields 𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜇 = 𝜔 . A direct computation gives im( 𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 ) = im 𝐴 𝑃 , since ker( 𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 ) = ker 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 ; feasibility therefore makes the multiplier equation solvable. The minimum-norm solution of that equation is 𝜇 ⋆ = ( 𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 )+𝜔 . Hence, 𝑧 ⋆ = 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜇 ⋆ and 

𝛿 ⋆ = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝑧 ⋆ give the claimed form. With 𝑀 ∶= 𝐴 𝑃 𝐶 −1  

> 𝑃

𝐴 ⊤𝑃 ,

𝑧 ⋆⊤ 𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 ⋆ = 𝜇 ⋆⊤ 𝑀𝜇 ⋆ = 𝜔 ⊤𝑀 +𝑀𝑀 +𝜔 = 𝜔 ⊤𝑀 +𝜔, 

which is the reported squared intervention cost. The objective value of 12 𝑧 ⊤𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 is half of that cost. Uniqueness of the minimizer 𝛿 ⋆ follows from strict convexity of that objective on 𝑉 𝑃 , where 𝐶 𝑃 ≻ 0.

Soft Tikhonov argument. The objective 12 𝛿 ⊤𝐶𝛿 + ( 𝜆 ∕2) ‖𝐷𝛿 − 𝜔 ‖2, restricted to 𝛿 = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝑧 , becomes 12 𝑧 ⊤𝐶 𝑃 𝑧 +(𝜆 ∕2) ‖‖𝐴 𝑃 𝑧 − 𝜔 ‖‖2. Stationarity in 𝑧 gives (𝐶 𝑃 + 𝜆𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 )𝑧 = 𝜆𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔 , equivalently (𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 + 𝜆 −1 𝐶 𝑃 )𝑧 = 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔 . The operator on the left is positive definite on 𝑉 𝑃 as the sum of a positive-semidefinite term and a positive-definite term, so the unique solution is 𝑧 ⋆𝜆 = ( 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝐴 𝑃 + 𝜆 −1 𝐶 𝑃 )−1 𝐴 ⊤𝑃 𝜔 , and 𝛿 ⋆𝜆 = 𝜄 𝑉 𝑃 𝑧 ⋆𝜆 .

Budget-antitonicity argument. For the same ambient metric 𝐶 and 𝑉 𝑃 1 ⊆ 𝑉 𝑃 2 , the feasible set at 𝑃 1 is contained in that at 𝑃 2. The minimum of the same strictly convex objective over a smaller feasible set is at least the minimum over the larger set; hence, ‖‖𝛿 ⋆(𝑃 1)‖‖2 

> 𝐶

≥ ‖‖𝛿 ⋆(𝑃 2)‖‖2 

> 𝐶

. If the metric changes with the budget, this set-inclusion argument no longer proves any cost inequality. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 35 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

B.3. Identifiability proposition: detailed proof and monotonicity corollary 

Proposition (Identifiability dimensions) . With  = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 and  = ker 𝐷 ∕, the dimensions satisfy 

dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), dim  = rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), and dim ker 𝐷 = dim  + dim .Proof. The identity ker( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ) = ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 =  follows from the definition of the restriction. Rank–nullity for 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ∶ ker 𝐷 → 𝑌 gives dim ker 𝐷 = dim ker( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ) + rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), which is the first identity. The quotient dimension formula gives dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − dim  = rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), the second identity. Adding the first two identities cancels rank( 𝑂 |ker 𝐷 ), leaving the third, dim ker 𝐷 = dim  + dim .

Corollary B.3 (Monotonicity of  under finer observations) . If 𝑂 1, 𝑂 2 have ker 𝑂 1 ⊇ ker 𝑂 2, meaning that 𝑂 2 observes everything 𝑂 1 observes and possibly more, then dim (𝑂 2) ≤ dim (𝑂 1), and correspondingly dim (𝑂 2) ≥ dim (𝑂 1).Proof. ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 2 ⊆ ker 𝐷 ∩ ker 𝑂 1, so dim (𝑂 2) ≤ dim (𝑂 1). The complementary inequality on  follows from dim  = dim ker 𝐷 − dim .

B.4. Closure-recovery corollary: detailed proof 

Corollary (Closure-restricted recoverability) . Let 𝐷 𝐶 be the closure-channel block of 𝐷 under Assumption A0, as a typed map 𝐶 0(𝐹 )closure → 𝐶 1(𝐹 )closure . If 𝜔 closure ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 , the unique minimum-norm closure correction in the Euclidean metric is 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝐷 𝐶 +𝜔 closure ∈ im( 𝐷 ⊤𝐶 ) = row( 𝐷 𝐶 ), and the repaired stalks (𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 − 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 |𝑖 , 𝑜 𝑖 , 𝜖 𝑖 )𝑖 ∈𝐼 have closure-channel admissibility defect equal to zero, with non-closure channels unchanged. Proof. Apply Theorem 1, or directly Lemma B.2, to the restricted closure-channel problem 

min   

> 𝑧 ∈𝐶 0(𝐹 )closure
> 12

‖𝑧 ‖2 subject to 𝐷 𝐶 𝑧 = 𝜔 closure .

The closed-form solution to this smaller problem is 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 𝐷 𝐶 +𝜔 closure . The correction inserted into the full stalk vector is the zero-extension 𝜄 closure 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 ; throughout this proof, 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 denotes the restricted closure vector whenever no ambiguity is possible. The pseudoinverse range identity 𝐷 𝐶 +𝑦 ∈ (ker 𝐷 𝐶 )⟂ = im( 𝐷 ⊤𝐶 ) = row( 𝐷 𝐶 ) for 𝑦 ∈ im 𝐷 𝐶 

gives the membership statement. For the raw defect 𝜔 = 𝐷𝑠 , substituting the zero-extended correction into the full stalk vector under the A1 sign convention gives 𝑠 repaired = 𝑠 − 𝜄 closure 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 . Consequently, on the closure channel, 

(𝐷𝑠 repaired )closure = 𝜔 closure − 𝐷 𝐶 𝛿 ⋆𝐶 = 0 . Because 𝐷 is block diagonal under Assumption A0, (𝐷𝑠 repaired )∙ = ( 𝐷𝑠 )∙

for every non-closure channel ∙.

B.5. Theorem 2: detailed proof 

Theorem (Conservation-contract detectability) . For an oriented edge 𝑒 = ( 𝑎, 𝑏 ) and repaired endpoint 𝑞 ∈ { 𝑎, 𝑏 },assume baseline cancellation, one-sided zero neighbor contribution on 𝑒 , positive rank of 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

, and row-space alignment 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 ∈ row( 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

). Then 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑒

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min (𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) ⋅ 𝜖 repair .

Without row-space alignment, the same argument gives the projected bound Eq. 9 .Proof. Set 𝜌 ∶= 𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

. Baseline cancellation and the one-sided zero-contribution assumption give 𝜔 closure  

> 𝑒

= 𝜀 𝑞 𝜌𝛿𝑐 𝑞 ,with 𝜀 𝑞 ∈ {−1 , +1} . Decompose 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 = 𝛿𝑐 ∥ 

> 𝑞

+ 𝛿𝑐 ⟂ 

> 𝑞

, where 𝛿𝑐 ∥ 

> 𝑞

∈ row( 𝜌 ) and 𝛿𝑐 ⟂ 

> 𝑞

∈ ker 𝜌 . Then 𝜌𝛿𝑐 𝑞 = 𝜌𝛿𝑐 ∥ 

> 𝑞

. The singular-value lower bound for 𝜌 restricted to its row space gives ‖‖‖𝜌𝛿𝑐 ∥

> 𝑞

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min (𝜌 ) ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 ∥

> 𝑞

‖‖‖. Hence, 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑒

‖‖‖ = ‖‖‖𝜌𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min 

‖‖‖Πrow( 𝜌 )𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ ,

which is Eq. 9. Under row-space alignment, 𝛿𝑐 𝑞 ∈ row( 𝜌 ), so the kernel component is zero and ‖‖‖Πrow( 𝜌 )𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ = ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ =

𝜖 repair , recovering Eq. 8. 

## C. Algorithmic details and complexity 

This appendix collects implementation-level details of the algorithms presented in Section 8, with complexity analysis and numerical-stability considerations. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 36 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

C.1. Coboundary assembly 

The coboundary matrix 𝐷 has a block structure indexed by (edge , region ). For each edge (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝐸 , the corresponding row block is [… , −𝜌 𝑖,𝑖𝑗 , … , +𝜌 𝑗,𝑖𝑗 , …] , with zeros in all column blocks not indexed by 𝑖 or 𝑗 .

Block sparsity. Each edge contributes exactly two nonzero column blocks. The matrix 𝐷 therefore has exactly 2|𝐸 |

nonzero blocks. For typical covers with |𝐸 | ≪ |𝐼 |2, storage and matrix–vector costs scale with |𝐸 | rather than with the number of region pairs. Path covers, for example, satisfy |𝐸 | = |𝐼 | − 1 .

Channel block-diagonal structure. When the restriction maps respect the channel decomposition, 𝐷 is block diagonal with respect to the channel partition. The channel blocks 𝐷 ∙ for ∙ ∈ {state , closure , obs , meta} can be assembled independently. This decomposition reduces the SVD cost by a constant factor because a sum of smaller SVDs is cheaper than one large SVD when the channel sizes differ. The block-diagonal structure is also essential for the channel decomposition of 𝜔 in Eq. 1. 

Numerical realization. After assembly, Algorithm 2 is applied once for each budget basis 𝑄 , whose orthonormal columns span 𝑉 𝑃 = im 𝑃 . The algorithm uses 𝐴 𝑃 = 𝐷𝑄 and 𝐶 𝑃 = 𝑄 ⊤𝐶𝑄 , the hard image-membership residual, the minimum-cost formula of Theorem 1, and the separately reported Tikhonov record. The returned correction lies in 𝑉 𝑃 

and is subtracted from the current stalk vector according to Eq. 3. 

C.2. Pseudoinverse implementation 

We use the truncated SVD-based pseudoinverse with a rank-tolerance threshold 𝜂 rank ∶= max( 𝑚, 𝑛 ) ⋅ 𝜖 mach ⋅ 𝜎 max 

as a SEAM-specific convention, where 𝜖 mach is the machine epsilon of the working floating-point type and 𝜎 max the largest singular value. The exact routine and version are recorded whenever an implementation uses a library default. For ill-conditioned matrices, including restriction maps with near-rank-deficient overlap blocks, the threshold can be tightened to 10 ⋅ 𝜖 mach ⋅ 𝜎 max at the cost of including near-singular directions in the pseudoinverse range. 

Stability under noise. For a perturbed matrix 𝐷 + Δ , pseudoinverse perturbation bounds require fixed rank or a spectral gap. Under such a rank-stability assumption, bounds of Wedin (1972, 1973) control ‖‖(𝐷 + Δ) + − 𝐷 +‖‖ with constants depending on the nonzero singular gap. Without fixed rank, the pseudoinverse need not be continuous. Therefore, the obstruction residual is sensitive to noise in 𝐷 when 𝜎 +min (𝐷 ) is small. In practice, when rank( 𝐷 ) > 0, we monitor the positive-rank condition number 

𝜅 +(𝐷 ) ∶= 𝜎 max (𝐷 )∕ 𝜎 +min (𝐷 )

and report warnings when 𝜅 +(𝐷 ) > 10 10 . When rank( 𝐷 ) = 0 , 𝜅 +(𝐷 ) is undefined because there is no nonzero singular value; rank-zero cases are reported separately. 

C.3. Budgeted intervention solver: numerical considerations 

Algorithm 2 uses the closed-form solution in the feasible case and the Tikhonov-regularized solution in the infeasible case. The transition between the two is governed by the feasibility tolerance 𝜂 feas . Three numerical considerations apply. 

Choice of 𝜂 feas . We set 

𝜂 feas ∶= max{10 −8 ‖𝜔 ‖ , 𝜂 feas ,min }

by default, with a fixed machine-scale 𝜂 feas ,min > 0. This positive-floor definition preserves the stated 𝜂 feas > 0 condition even when 𝜔 = 0 , avoiding spurious Tikhonov fallbacks triggered by linear-algebra roundoff. The choice can be overridden per call. 

Choice of 𝜆 . The Tikhonov regularizer controls the trade-off between residual size and intervention norm. By default, we set 

𝜆 ∶= max{ ‖𝜔 ‖ , 𝜀 𝜔 }10 max{ 𝜎 max (𝐴 𝑃 ), 𝜀 𝜎 } ,

with positive numerical floors. The soft branch is bypassed entirely when ‖𝜔 ‖ ≤ 𝜏 zero and the case is already globally admissible. The choice can be overridden per call.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 37 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Cost metric 𝐶 . The default cost metric is the identity, giving Euclidean intervention norms. Supported domain-specific cost metrics include a Mahalanobis norm with respect to a prior covariance, channel-weighted norms, and energy norms. 

C.4. Identifiability analyzer: numerical considerations 

Choice of 𝜂 svd . By default, we set 

𝜂 svd ∶= max{10 −8 𝜎 max , 𝜂 svd ,min }

for the kernel basis, with the same positive floor used for both the SVD of 𝐷 and the SVD of 𝑂𝑉 ker . A larger tolerance yields a more inclusive numerical ker 𝐷 and can create spurious blind directions by declaring genuinely nonzero singular values to be zero; a smaller tolerance is more conservative and can miss near-null or roundoff-null blind directions. 

Blind-subspace certificate. After computing the blind admissible basis 𝐵 , we verify ‖‖𝐷𝐵 ‖‖, ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖, orthonor-mality, and the numerical dimension identity from Proposition 7.2. Together, these checks form the certificate; ‖‖𝑂𝐵 ‖‖

records the observation-invisibility component of that certificate. 

Channel decomposition. The columns of 𝐵  are decomposed into block components by projecting onto the three primary channel subspaces and the optional metadata subspace. The resulting fractions are included in the diagnostic record. 

C.5. Monitoring pipeline: caching 

The monitoring pipeline in Algorithm 4 caches all quantities that do not depend on the streaming input. 

Cached quantities. The cache stores the coboundary matrix 𝐷 , its SVD factors 𝑈 𝐷 , Σ𝐷 , 𝑉 𝐷 , the pseudoinverse 𝐷 +,and the channel-block submatrices 𝐷 ∙. The cache also stores each projected coboundary 𝐷𝑃 𝑏 with its pseudoinverse. When the observation map is static, the blind admissible basis 𝐵  is cached as well. 

Per-call quantities. Only 𝑠 (𝑡 ) = (vec( 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑡 ))) 𝑖 ∈𝐼 , 𝜔 (𝑡 ) = 𝐷𝑠 (𝑡 ), and the per-budget intervention costs need to be recomputed per call. The wall-clock cost is dominated by one matrix–vector product with 𝐷 plus |bud | projection operations. 

## D. CT-SEAM conservation backend 

This appendix describes the CT-SEAM local generator used in selected PDE experiments. The backend supplies closure-rich explanations through the common SEAM-Ω generator interface in the conservation-contract detectability and backend-interoperability studies. 

D.1. Motivation and construction 

For PDE systems with conservation laws such as mass, momentum, and energy, a local finite-volume solver may drift from exact conservation due to discretization, boundary handling, or numerical flux choices. A conservation contract enforces conservation by applying a mass-redistribution repair at each step; the accumulated absolute magnitude of that repair may be recorded as optional contract metadata. 

Local generator. Given a finite-volume Burgers solver on region 𝑈 𝑖 , the generator first computes each state update by standard finite-volume time integration. The generator then evaluates the conservation residual 

Δ𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ∶= ∫𝑈 𝑖 

𝑢 (𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑥 − ∫𝑈 𝑖 

𝑢 (0) 𝑑𝑥 + flux contributions .

Whenever |Δ𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 )| > 𝜏 cons , the generator applies a mass-redistribution repair by adding 𝛿 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ∶= −Δ 𝑚 𝑖 (𝑡 )∕ |𝑈 𝑖 | to the state on 𝑈 𝑖 . This correction restores exact conservation. The generator accumulates the repair in the closure block according to 𝑐 𝑖 += 𝛿 𝑖 (𝑡 ) ⋅ 𝜒 𝑈 𝑖 , where 𝜒 𝑈 𝑖 is the indicator function of 𝑈 𝑖 in the closure space.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 38 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Explanation block. The state block of a CT-SEAM explanation contains the conservation-corrected solution. The closure block contains the accumulated repair history, represented by one scalar for each region and optionally weighted by a Gaussian centered at the repair location. The observation block is empty because this solver consumes no sensor data. The optional metadata block contains the accumulated absolute repair magnitude 𝜖 abs  

> 𝑖

∶= ∑𝑡 |𝛿 𝑖 (𝑡 )|.

D.2. Role in Theorem 2 

Theorem 2 connects the actual closure-channel vector entering an overlap restriction to the SEAM-Ω closure-channel obstruction. For an oriented edge 𝑒 and repaired endpoint 𝑞 , under baseline cancellation, one-sided zero neighbor contribution, positive rank, and row-space alignment, 

‖‖‖𝜔 closure 

> 𝑒

‖‖‖ ≥ 𝜎 +min (𝜌 closure  

> 𝑞,𝑒

) ⋅ ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ .

The conservation-contract detectability study and its discretization-tolerant parametric sweep evaluate this diagnostic using the repair-vector convention defined in that study’s setup. The shared interface also accepts the analytic and finite-volume generators used in the local–global amplitude-mismatch, data–physics conflict-attribution, PDE model-form discrimination, and random-sinusoid Burgers studies, as well as the tabular regression generators used in the application studies. The conservation-contract detectability and backend-interoperability studies use CT-SEAM specifically, with the detectability study providing the parametric evaluation of the claim in Theorem 2. 

## E. Experimental protocols, baselines, and data provenance 

This appendix records the common experimental configuration, external data sources, preprocessing or generation steps, comparative baselines, and robustness checks needed to interpret the results of Section 9. 

E.1. Common configuration and random-seed protocol 

Cover construction. 1D PDE experiments use a uniform partition of [0 , 1] into three regions with a 10% overlap fraction. Real-world experiments use either seasonal temporal covers or abstract overlap-list covers, as detailed below. 

Solvers. PDE solvers use finite-volume schemes with periodic boundaries. Time integration is by explicit Euler with CFL number 0.4, following the standard finite-volume framework for hyperbolic conservation laws (LeVeque, 2002). The grid resolution is 𝑁 𝑥 = 200 per region. 

Seed schedule and aggregation. The standard schedule is a fixed set of 𝑛 = 5 seeds, used for every stochastic experiment, including the FNO OOD monitoring study. Stochastic results report mean ± standard deviation over that schedule. Deterministic experiments are also executed across the same schedule to verify seed-invariance; their results are reported once, or equivalently as a zero-dispersion aggregate where a cross-suite figure requires a common format. Analyses using additional seeds are identified as robustness checks. Seed-resolved and aggregate outputs are retained with the study artifacts. 

FNO training and aggregation. The FNO OOD monitoring models are trained on the five standard seeds with all other configuration settings fixed. For each shift family and seed, the protocol records the per-trajectory pair 

(‖‖𝜔 (𝑡 f )‖‖ , ‖‖‖𝑢 FNO (𝑡 f ) − 𝑢 ref (𝑡 f )‖‖‖𝐿 2 ). Pearson and Spearman correlations are computed per seed and then reported as mean ± standard deviation across the five seeds; the 95% bootstrap CI is also reported for every seed. The confidence-based comparator is a separate five-member ensemble whose otherwise identical members use distinct initialization seeds. 

Deterministic and data-loading checks. The conservation-contract detectability study has zero standard deviation across all five seeds. The random-sinusoid Burgers study is deterministic conditional on a given seed and reports 

‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .4754 ± 0 .0000 under the aggregate format. In the metro traffic seasonality study, the data-loading and AR(2)-fitting path is deterministic given the seed, so the multi-seed standard deviation is zero; the Potomac streamflow seasonality study likewise reports 0.0266 ± 0 .0000 . The three site values in the multi-site streamflow comparison are verified to be seed-invariant across the schedule. The air-quality temporal-consistency study uses the fixed UCI dataset and preprocessing protocol of Appendix E.3; its OLS fit and obstruction computation are deterministic, yielding 

‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 .2850 with zero seed dispersion.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 39 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Seed-resolved experimental outcomes. For the zero-floor negative control, every one of the five identical-model control runs is below 10 −10 . In the financial regime-detection study, the closure channel dominates on all five seeds, and the identical-model control has ‖𝜔 ‖ = 0 on every seed. In the industrial multi-zone fault-detection study, the state channel dominates the fault response on all five seeds, and the identical-zone control is zero on every seed. For each of the three model families in the household-power cross-framework audit, the state channel dominates on all five seeds; the winter–spring overlap is dominant on four of the five seeds. 

Sweeps and ablations. The conservation-contract detectability sweep crosses five values of 𝜖 repair = ‖‖‖𝛿𝑐 𝑞 

‖‖‖ with the five-seed schedule, producing 25 configurations. The controlled predictor-perturbation result is evaluated on all five seeds and 10 random directions at each perturbation magnitude. The empirical monotonicity fraction of that result is 

1.00 ± 0 .00 across seeds and directions. A 50-seed robustness analysis gives the same monotonicity, attaining 1.00 for every seed and direction. 

E.2. Data sources and generated cases 

Table E.1 records the external data sources and generated cases used in Section 9, together with their source citations. Preprocessing and generation steps follow in Appendix E.3.               

> Table E.1
> External sources and generated cases associated with the experiments. License information is taken from the cited repository or publisher records. Dataset Used in License Source UCI Metro Interstate Traffic Volume Metro traffic seasonality CC BY 4.0 Hogue (2019) USGS NWIS streamflow Potomac and multi-site streamflow Public domain under Section 105 of Title 17 of the United States Code U.S. Geological Survey (2023) UCI Air Quality Air-quality temporal consistency CC BY 4.0 De Vito (2016) UCI Individual Household Electric Power Consumption Household-power cross-framework audit CC BY 4.0 Hébrail and Berard (2012) Synthetic financial returns Financial regime detection Not applicable; synthetic Cont (2001) Synthetic industrial process Industrial multi-zone fault detection Not applicable; synthetic Venkatasubramanian et al. (2003)

E.3. Preprocessing details 

Metro traffic seasonality: UCI Metro Interstate Traffic Volume. Hourly traffic counts on I-94 in Minnesota. Feature engineering: temperature converted from kelvin to degrees Celsius, cloud-cover percentage, and cyclical hour encoding. Seasonal split: winter = Dec–Feb, summer = Jun–Aug, transition = Mar–May plus Sep–Nov. 

Potomac and multi-site streamflow: USGS NWIS. Daily discharge values obtained from USGS Water Data for the Nation via the dataretrieval Python package. Normalization: per-site standardization to zero mean and unit variance. Seasonal split: spring snowmelt = Mar–May, baseflow = Jun–Sep, autumn transition = Oct–Nov. 

Air-quality temporal consistency: UCI Air Quality. Hourly readings of CO, C 6H6, NO 𝑥 , and NO 2 from March 2004 to February 2005. Imputation: per-channel median substitution for the −200 sentinel values. Seasonal split: cold = Oct–Feb, warm = Apr–Sep, transition = Mar. 

Household-power cross-framework audit: UCI Individual Household Electric Power Consumption. Two years of one-minute power measurements, aggregated to hourly means. Features: cyclical hour (sin , cos) of hour-of-day, standardized Voltage , standardized Global_reactive_power . Target: Global_active_power . Seasonal split by meteorological season: winter = Dec–Feb, spring = Mar–May, summer = Jun–Aug, autumn = Sep–Nov.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 40 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy

Random-sinusoid Burgers initial conditions. Initial conditions follow the ten-wave, Gaussian-amplitude distribution specified in Section 9.7.1; the local solver generates all trajectories. 

Financial regime detection: synthetic returns. Five trading years comprising 1260 daily observations are generated. The bull regime uses 𝜇 bull = 0 .001 and 𝜎 bull = 0 .007 ; the bear regime uses 𝜇 bear = −0 .001 and 𝜎 bear = 0 .018 ; and the sideways regime uses 𝜇 sw = 0 .0 and 𝜎 sw = 0 .012 . The regime construction targets the volatility clustering and regime-dependent variance described by Cont (2001). 

Industrial multi-zone fault detection: synthetic process. Three serial zones are each modeled by a multivariate linear regressor from (𝑇 , 𝑝, 𝑞 ) to a process output, where 𝑇 , 𝑝 , and 𝑞 represent temperature, pressure, and flow. A 0.3𝜎 

step-change fault is injected into the midstream zone at the midpoint of the evaluation window. The framework follows the process-monitoring tradition of Venkatasubramanian et al. (2003). 

E.4. Baselines used in the reported experiments 

The household-power cross-framework audit uses SK, XGB, and SM as predictive-model baselines, and the FNO OOD monitoring study uses ensemble variance as its monitoring comparator. Section 9.9.2 compares ‖𝜔 ‖ with two scalar disagreement metrics, cross-prediction RMSE and mean absolute pairwise difference, computed on the same covers in the metro traffic seasonality, Potomac streamflow seasonality, and air-quality temporal-consistency studies. The study artifacts include the full multi-seed statistics underlying that comparison. 

Official baseline implementations. The SK, XGB, and SM packages are imported from their official Python Package Index distributions. 

E.5. Robustness and reporting provenance 

Number of seeds. The standard five-seed schedule, the 50-seed controlled predictor-perturbation robustness analysis, and their seed-resolved outcomes are specified in Appendix E.1. 

Sensitivity to overlap fraction. For 1D PDE experiments, varying the overlap fraction 𝛼 ov ∈ {5% , 10% , 20%} 

produces ‖𝜔 ‖ values within a factor of 1.5 of the default value, and the dominant-channel conclusions are preserved across the tested range. The sensitivity checks above are complemented by the following data-provenance records. 

Data provenance. Each real-data source is identified by an authoritative source citation or repository link, with preprocessing specified in Appendix E.3.   

> G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 41 of 43

Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

## References 

Abramsky, S., Brandenburger, A., 2011. The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and contextuality. New Journal of Physics 13, 113036. Bellman, R., Åström, K.J., 1970. On structural identifiability. Mathematical Biosciences 7, 329–339. Bodnar, C., Giovanni, F.D., Chamberlain, B.P., Lió, P., Bronstein, M.M., 2022. Neural Sheaf Diffusion: A Topological Perspective on Heterophily and Oversmoothing in GNNs, in: NeurIPS. Bredon, G.E., 1997. Sheaf theory. volume 170. Brynjarsdóttir, J., O’Hagan, A., 2014. Learning about physical parameters: The importance of model discrepancy. Inverse Problems 30, 114007. Chen, J., Xu, W., Xu, Z., Gutiérrez, N.G., Narra, S.P., McComb, C., 2025. Enforcing the principle of locality for physical simulations with neural operators. J. Comput. Phys. 538, 114131. Chen, T., Guestrin, C., 2016. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System, in: KDD, pp. 785–794. Cont, R., 2001. Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and statistical issues. Quantitative Finance 1, 223. Curry, J.M., 2014. Sheaves, cosheaves and applications. De Vito, S., 2016. Air Quality. https://doi.org/10.24432/C59K5F .Duraisamy, K., Iaccarino, G., Xiao, H., 2019. Turbulence modeling in the age of data. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 51, 357–377. Engl, H.W., Hanke, M., Neubauer, A., 1996. Regularization of inverse problems. volume 375. Gama, J., Zliobaite, I., Bifet, A., Pechenizkiy, M., Bouchachia, A., 2014. A survey on concept drift adaptation. ACM Comput. Surv. 46, 44:1–44:37. Ghrist, R.W., 2014. Elementary applied topology. volume 1. Gomes, C., Thule, C., Broman, D., Larsen, P.G., Vangheluwe, H., 2018. Co-Simulation: A Survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 51, 49:1–49:33. Guo, C., Pleiss, G., Sun, Y., Weinberger, K.Q., 2017. On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks, in: ICML, pp. 1321–1330. Hansen, J., Gebhart, T., 2020. Sheaf Neural Networks. CoRR abs/2012.06333. Hansen, J., Ghrist, R., 2019. Toward a spectral theory of cellular sheaves. J. Appl. Comput. Topol. 3, 315–358. Hansen, J., Ghrist, R., 2021. Opinion Dynamics on Discourse Sheaves. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 81, 2033–2060. Hébrail, G., Berard, A., 2012. Individual household electric power consumption. https://doi.org/10.24432/C58K54 .Hegde, A., Li, W., Oreluk, J., Packard, A.K., Frenklach, M., 2018. Consistency Analysis for Massively Inconsistent Datasets in Bound-to-Bound Data Collaboration. SIAM/ASA J. Uncertain. Quantification 6, 429–456. Hendrycks, D., Gimpel, K., 2017. A Baseline for Detecting Misclassified and Out-of-Distribution Examples in Neural Networks, in: ICLR. Hogue, J., 2019. Metro Interstate Traffic Volume. https://doi.org/10.24432/C5X60B .Jagtap, A.D., Karniadakis, G.E., 2021. Extended Physics-informed Neural Networks (XPINNs): A Generalized Space-Time Domain Decomposition based Deep Learning Framework for Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations, in: AAAI Spring Symposium: MLPS. Jagtap, A.D., Kharazmi, E., Karniadakis, G.E., 2020. Conservative physics-informed neural networks on discrete domains for conservation laws: Applications to forward and inverse problems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 365, 113028. Karniadakis, G.E., Kevrekidis, I.G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., Yang, L., 2021. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics 3, 422–440. Kennedy, M.C., O’Hagan, A., 2001. Bayesian calibration of computer models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 63, 425–464. Kovachki, N.B., Li, Z., Liu, B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A.M., Anandkumar, A., 2023. Neural Operator: Learning Maps Between Function Spaces With Applications to PDEs. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 24, 89:1–89:97. Krishnapriyan, A.S., Gholami, A., Zhe, S., Kirby, R.M., Mahoney, M.W., 2021. Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks, in: NeurIPS, pp. 26548–26560. LeVeque, R.J., 2002. Finite volume methods for hyperbolic problems. volume 31. Li, Z., Kovachki, N.B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Liu, B., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A.M., Anandkumar, A., 2021. Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential Equations, in: ICLR. Lim, L., 2020. Hodge Laplacians on Graphs. SIAM Rev. 62, 685–715. Lu, L., Jin, P., Pang, G., Zhang, Z., Karniadakis, G.E., 2021. Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 218–229. Moseley, B., Markham, A., Nissen-Meyer, T., 2023. Finite basis physics-informed neural networks (FBPINNs): a scalable domain decomposition approach for solving differential equations. Adv. Comput. Math. 49, 62. Narasimhan, S., Jordache, C., 1999. Data reconciliation and gross error detection: An intelligent use of process data. Ovadia, Y., Fertig, E., Ren, J., Nado, Z., Sculley, D., Nowozin, S., Dillon, J.V., Lakshminarayanan, B., Snoek, J., 2019. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty? Evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift, in: NeurIPS, pp. 13969–13980. Page, E.S., 1954. Continuous inspection schemes. Biometrika 41, 100–115. Parish, E.J., Duraisamy, K., 2016. A paradigm for data-driven predictive modeling using field inversion and machine learning. J. Comput. Phys. 305, 758–774. Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., VanderPlas, J., Passos, A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duchesnay, E., 2011. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830. Penrose, R., 1955. A generalized inverse for matrices, in: Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, pp. 406–413. Quarteroni, A., Valli, A., 1999. Domain decomposition methods for partial differential equations. Rabanser, S., Günnemann, S., Lipton, Z.C., 2019. Failing Loudly: An Empirical Study of Methods for Detecting Dataset Shift, in: NeurIPS, pp. 1394–1406. Rackauckas, C., Ma, Y., Martensen, J., Warner, C., Zubov, K., Supekar, R., Skinner, D., Ramadhan, A.J., 2020. Universal Differential Equations for Scientific Machine Learning. CoRR abs/2001.04385. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 42 of 43 Global consistency beyond local accuracy 

Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., Karniadakis, G.E., 2019. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. J. Comput. Phys. 378, 686–707. Raue, A., Kreutz, C., Maiwald, T., Bachmann, J., Schilling, M., Klingmüller, U., Timmer, J., 2009. Structural and practical identifiability analysis of partially observed dynamical models by exploiting the profile likelihood. Bioinform. 25, 1923–1929. Reiter, R., 1987. A Theory of Diagnosis from First Principles. Artif. Intell. 32, 57–95. Robinson, M., 2014. Topological signal processing. volume 81. Robinson, M., 2017a. Sheaf and duality methods for analyzing multi-model systems, in: Recent Applications of Harmonic Analysis to Function Spaces, Differential Equations, and Data Science: Novel Methods in Harmonic Analysis, Volume 2, pp. 653–703. Robinson, M., 2017b. Sheaves are the canonical data structure for sensor integration. Inf. Fusion 36, 208–224. Robinson, M., 2020. Assignments to sheaves of pseudometric spaces. Compositionality 2, 2. Seabold, S., Perktold, J., 2010. Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling with Python, in: SciPy, p. 92. Shukla, K., Jagtap, A.D., Karniadakis, G.E., 2021. Parallel physics-informed neural networks via domain decomposition. J. Comput. Phys. 447, 110683. Takamoto, M., Praditia, T., Leiteritz, R., MacKinlay, D., Alesiani, F., Pflüger, D., Niepert, M., 2022. PDEBench: An Extensive Benchmark for Scientific Machine Learning, in: NeurIPS. U.S. Geological Survey, 2023. USGS water data for the nation: US Geological Survey National Water Information System database. Venkatasubramanian, V., Rengaswamy, R., Yin, K., Kavuri, S.N., 2003. A review of process fault detection and diagnosis: Part I: Quantitative model-based methods. Comput. Chem. Eng. 27, 293–311. Walter, E., Pronzato, L., 1997. Identification of Parametric Models from Experimental Data. Berlin. Wedin, P.Å., 1972. Perturbation bounds in connection with singular value decomposition. BIT Numerical Mathematics 12, 99–111. Wedin, P.Å., 1973. Perturbation theory for pseudo-inverses. BIT Numerical Mathematics 13, 217–232. Willard, J., Jia, X., Xu, S., Steinbach, M.S., Kumar, V., 2023. Integrating Scientific Knowledge with Machine Learning for Engineering and Environmental Systems. ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 66:1–66:37. 

G.L.R. N’guessan and B.J. Kim: Preprint Page 43 of 43